1.Emotional blocks, natural happy: 
What I mean by this is that all the levels that represent falsehood are the spiritual 
and emotional blocks that actually keep us on a leash, as we are naturally happy and free.
The sun always shines, but the clouds sometimes block it. We are the sky. UI Integration note: 
Create also an amazing animation that proves this point.

2. Looking for God at the bottom of the box:

A lot of people are ran by religious fear, living in a constant state of guilt (sin, the
belief that they should be punished). The truth is that God is in the higher power based levels
, God and the Universe is all loving and they don't want you to suffer for them.

UI Integration notes: New section in the Essentials tab: Common Traps. This common traps section has
inside more sections, where we will also place this one which is named:
"Where do I look for Happiness? "

3. Power Vs Force: Providing a throughout description of force, power and the difference 
between them from Hawkins's POV, and also why do people choose force and how can we choose
power instead.

UI Integration Notes: a new section in the Essentials Tab; named simply Power Vs Force

4. Levels of truth: What I mean is to explain the concept that the levels of truth do not necessarily
always agree one with the other. Explain the concept of truth being subjective, and depending
on the context one may choose a different path and that does not necessarily mean that that path is wrong
 
UI Integration notes: a new section in the Essentials tab, named simply Levels of truth

5. Intention: Explain the concept that intention is actually karma. The reason why we do things
is more important than the action itself. (example: one can donate to charity out of goodwill
and pure intentions, or to be well liked and get some extra benefits). Also add the fact that people
are unconsciously aware at all times of our intentions, we are just too busy/unaware/ignorant to notice it.

UI Integration notes: a new section in the Essentials tab, named simply Intention

6. Music: I want to explain the users that the musics can also be measured from this point of view of a level of consciousness.

Therefore, the energy quality of the music affects us and is very important which music do we listen to. There is music
that can make us feel empowered since there is a lot of energy into it (anger), but the actual effect is detrimental.
It might help one get out of depression temporarily (since anger is higher than grief), but it's not a long term solution.
Therefore, it can be used as a tool. It can also be used as a tool to calm yourself, relax, and reach momentarily higher levels.
(a lot of classical music can reach the level of love). The words carry a heavy weight as well, so be wary of the message
of the songs as well.


UI Integration notes: a new section in the Essentials tab, named simply Music as a Tool

7. Stress/fear/anxiety: We have a section for stress already. Let's rename it to Stress/fear/anxiety.Add the fact that fear is focused on the future,
while grief focuses on the past. Add also that you could say that the fear is "limited in quantity", the energy of fear has been accumulated for a lifetime
and it spills out in life experiences. Add:" one man's meat is another man's poison" - which proves that the source of stress and fear is internal.
The more you let go of fear, the less it will spill out in life experiences. Focusing on only one fear may have a 
limited practical clinical value, but letting go of the energy of fear itself will make the whole stack of fear collapse.Also all fears come from the fear of death.
UI Integration notes: add these ideas to the "Preventing Stress at the Source" tab in the essentials. Also, when you click on the "transcending fear" tab on the journey tab > dive insights -> Articles ->
add "Preventing Stress at the Source" as the article link and make it as a redirect to the link that we already have in the essentials


8.Grief/loss/abandonment/attachment: There is a section in Healing& Recovery named Handling Major Chrises which contains a lot of valuable 
information regarding this topic. Main things to include: grief focuses on the past, fear focuses on the future. All suffering is due to resistance (and create also a beautiful link
that can send us to the resistance page). You could say that the grief is "limited in quantity", as you let go of the energy of grief, the less it will spill out
in life experiences (the same as fear.)

UI Integration Notes: Transcending Grief- > Articles -> New article named Loss and Abandonment (which will be made on a new page, includes all the ideas above).

9.Fatigue, tiredness, energy: Add the fact that we are naturally very energic and happy, but we leak energy through the day because of all the emotional and 
spiritual blocks (defined by the force based levels of falsehood). Explain how we carry all the weight of the emotions repressed and surpressed during our life time
and releasing and letting go of it will make us more energic and joyful

UI Integration Notes: New section in the essentials tab named Fatigue vs Energy

10.Happiness, fulfillment, satisfaction : explain how desire can never get satisfied, like a black hole (since it's force based)
Explain how happiness comes from within by releasing the emotional and spiritual blocks. Satisfaction is temporary, fulfillment is forever.
UI Integration Notes: New section in essentials tab: Fulfillment vs Satisfaction.

11. Positive thinking, affirmations: Explain how letting go of the old beliefs is necessary but also how it can be useful
to simultaneously replace them with better ones. This is where affirmations come into play. Letting go of the falsehood, force
based beliefs will make the affirmations be much more useful and productive, whereas they can feel forceful if one is too
deep into his own negative beliefs.

UI Integration Notes: "Positive Re-programming" new section into the Essentials Tab

12. Effort. Explain how "Human effort is necessary only to learn that human effort as such is useless and God’s will alone is the real power that controls and brings about all events. When you realise this truth, human effort ceases and divine will 
starts its work in you, and then you do all things in the freedom of the soul, liberated from care, fear and sorrow" . Make a recap on Power Vs Force concepts 
which conclude that it's very possible to have better results with less effort (as we all know about work smart not hard).

UI Integration Notes:  New "Effort" section in the Essentials Tab

13. Integrating your shadow. Accepting your hummaness and your animal reactions -> A lot of people judge themselves 
because of their humaness, which further reinforces their guilt and only makes matters worse. Heal through compassion for the
animal part of us that does not know any better.

UI Integration notes: "Shadow work/Accepting your humanness" new section in the Essentials Tab

14.Non reactivity: Explain how letting go of wanting to express our anger makes us non reactive therefore we automatically
act non reactive, out of power. Once we react to something we are the effect of it and we give our power away. 
We are the source, not the effect
UI Integration notes: "Non Reactivity" new section in the Essentials Tab

15. Relaxing: Explain how the body and mind naturally relax the more you let go. But good practice is to treat tension at all the levels: body, mind and spirit.(same as ilnesses, it's general health advice). It also improves the effects of medicines.
Therefore stretching and massages help tremendously. The more you let go of emotional blocks, the better healing is 
facilitated by physical treatments. Therefore, there is a compound effect of letting go across all levels.

UI Integration notes: "Relaxing" new section in the Essentials Tab

16.Knowledge: Knowledge is only good if you apply it. It's important to accumulate knowledge over a long period of time
and familiarise yourself with concepts, but it comes a time when practice makes the diffenrence

UI Integration notes: "Knowledge" new section in the Essentials Tab

17. Spiritual progress is not linear: Since consciousness is not linear neither, it's we all have our ups and downs. Therefore 
we should not judge ourselves for not being happy, or for not having reached our goals yet. This is a common mistake
of the spiritual student attacked by its own spiritual pride with guilt, which does not help but further impedes progress.

UI Integration: "Spiritual Progresss" in the Common Traps section we have created earlier

18. Addiction:

Explain how we are the sky, the clouds are the force based levels of falsehood and the sun always shines. Well, drugs temporarily
remove the "clouds" (the lower force based levels).But this is cheating from a karmical point of view, because one did 
not take the actual spiritual path of walking the path of truth, therefore one experiences withdrawal which brings you 
even lower than you were before. Understanding that we are naturally happy and free and we can do that as well without taking drugs, gambling, escaping, etc.

UI Integration: "Addiction" section in the Essentials Tab