ALSO BY DAVID R. HAWKINS, M.D., PH.D.
Dissolving the Ego, Realizing the Self
Along the Path to Enlightenment
Letting Go
Healing and Recovery
Reality, Spirituality, and Modern Man
Discovery of the Presence of God: Devotional Nonduality
Truth vs. Falsehood: How to Tell the Difference
I: Reality and Subjectivity
The Eye of the I: From Which Nothing Is Hidden
Power vs. Force: The Hidden
Determinants of Human Behavior
Dialogues on Consciousness and Spirituality
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis and Calibration
of the Levels of Human Consciousness
Orthomolecular Psychiatry
(with linus Pauling)
Please visit:
Hay House UsA:
www.hayhouse.com
®
Hay House Australia:
www.hayhouse.com.au
Hay House Uk:
www.hayhouse.co.uk
Hay House south Africa:
www.hayhouse.co.za
Hay House india:
www.hayhouse.co.in

Copyright © 2006 by David R. Hawkins
Published and distributed in the United States by:
Hay House, inc.:
www.hayhouse.com
®
•
Published and distributed in Australia by:
Hay House Australia Pty. ltd.:
www.hayhouse.com.au
•
Published and distributed in the United Kingdom by:
Hay House Uk, ltd.:
www.hayhouse.co.uk
•
Published and distributed in the Republic of South Africa by:
Hay House sA (Pty), ltd.:
www.hayhouse.co.za
•
Distributed in Canada by:
Raincoast:
www.raincoast.com
•
Published in India by:
Hay House Publishers india:
www.hayhouse.co.in
All rights reserved. no part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.
The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional and spiritual well-being. in the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, which is your constitutional right, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.
Previously published by veritas Publishing (isbn 978-097150075-4)
Library of Congress Control Number for the printed edition:
2013947044
Tradepaper ISBN:
978-1-4019-4505-3
16 15 14 13 4 3 2 1
1st Hay House edition, 2013
Printed in the United states of America

Straight and narrow is the path …
Waste no time.
Gloria in Excelsis Deo!

DEDICATION
This work is dedicated to
the liberation of the human spirit
from the bondage of adversity
and limitation that besets mankind
from both within and without.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Dedication
Tables and Charts
Foreword
Preface
Introduction
Map of the Scale of Consciousness
Section One
Calibration Levels Below 200: The Ego
Overview
The Evolution of Consciousness
Chapter 1
Shame: Despair
Chapter 2
Guilt and Vindictive Hate
Chapter 3
Apathy
Chapter 4
Grief
Chapter 5
Fear
Chapter 6
Desire
Chapter 7
Anger
Chapter 8
Pride
Section Two
Calibration Levels 200-499: Linear Mind
Overview
Brain Function and Physiology of Truth
Chapter 9
Courage
Chapter 10
Neutrality
Chapter 11
Willingness
Chapter 12
Acceptance
Chapter 13
Reason
Section Three
Calibration Levels 500-599: Spiritual Reality
Overview
Transcending Linear Duality
Chapter 14
Love
Chapter 15
Unconditional Love, Joy, and Ecstasy
Section Four
Calibration Levels 600-1,000: The Illumined, Enlightened States
Overview
Transcendence
Chapter 16
Peace, Bliss, and Illumination
Chapter 17
Self-Realization
Chapter 18
Full Enlightenment
Section Five
Transcendence
Overview
Spiritual Transformation
Chapter 19
Limitations and Distractions
Chapter 20
Passing Through The Gates
Chapter 21
Transcending The Mind
Chapter 22
Becoming The Prayer
Appendices
Appendix A
Map of the Scale of Consciousness
Appendix B
How to Calibrate the Levels of Consciousness
Appendix C
References
About the Author

TABLES AND CHARTS
Introduction
Map of the Scale of Consciousness
Sec. One Overview
Consciousness Levels of Archeological Eras
Animal Kingdom
Consciousness and Rate of Happiness
Chapter 1
The Dualities of Shame
Chapter 2
The Dualities of Guilt and Hate
Chapter 3
The Dualities of Apathy
Chapter 4
Progressive Levels of Abstraction
The Dualities of Grief
Chapter 5
The Dualities of Fear
Chapter 6
The Dualities of Desire
Chapter 7
The Dualities of Anger
Chapter 8
The Dualities of Pride
Sec. Two Overview
Brain Function and Physiology
Table 1: Function of Mind—Attitudes
Table 2: Function of Mind—Attitudes
Table 3: Function of Mind—Attitudes
Positive Personality Traits—Part I
Positive Personality Traits—Part II
Chapter 13
Great Books of the Western World
Chapter 14
Diagnostic Differential: Infatuation vs. Love
Chapter 15
Authentic Spiritual States
Chapter 16
Teachers and Writings in the 600s
Chapter 17
Teachers and Writings in the 700s
Chapter 18
Levels of Divinity
Teachers and Writings at 850+
Sec. Five Overview
Differentiation between Content and Context
Temptations
Chapter 21
Comparative Dualities

FOREWORD
The purpose of prior works was to explore and explain a new research technique based on consciousness and its application to all areas of life, including subjective spiritual experiences and realizations. The development of a pragmatic clinical science of truth emerged that could be used as a compass to guide man’s endless quest for truth. As described in previous studies, by virtue of its very structure, the human mind is incapable of discerning truth from falsehood, a fact of which mankind is painfully aware. The price of this ignorance and limitation has been enormous. Not only individuals but also whole civilizations have gone through staggering amounts of agony, suffering, and death.
The levels of consciousness will be examined specifically for the sake of the spiritual student, devotee, and integrous person interested in self-improvement for its own sake. By analyzing the various obstacles and levels to be transcended, certain principles that support spiritual evolution are self-revealing.
This work is therefore a practical manual rather than a comprehensive analysis, which has been presented in prior books (e.g., Section 1 of
Truth vs. Falsehood
, 2005). Although it alludes to prior work, the basic principles will again be covered. Material is also provided for the frustrated seeker who has ‘read everything, been everywhere’, attended all kinds of workshops, and yet seems to be ‘stuck’. (“My mind is like a sponge: It has absorbed all the information, but I’m still in the same place!”)
Because the lower levels of consciousness are the most painful and difficult to endure, it seemed best to start up the ladder of consciousness from the very bottom levels, which are the most agonizing. Just because they are the most painful does not mean they are the most difficult to transcend. On the contrary, the very pain of such lower levels urges one forward to seek relief.
In transcending the levels of consciousness, the importance of the human ‘will’ is emphasized because it is the most critical of all functions in spiritual work. Relatively little attention has been paid to the will in proportion to its extreme importance, for the will is the invitation to Divine intervention.

PREFACE
The basic research on the nature and levels of consciousness has been described in previous works. The first was published in the form of a dissertation (
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis and Calibration of the Levels of Human Consciousness
, 1995.) Next came
Power vs. Force
(also 1995), which included explanations and elaborations. The following two books were devoted to spiritual truth and enlightenment:
The Eye of the I
(2001), and
I: Reality and Subjectivity
(2003).
While the last two books were devoted to personal enlightenment,
Truth vs. Falsehood
(2005) investigated the distribution and evolution of levels of consciousness in public life and society, as well as in the individual. The thrust of that study was to denote a roadway to peace and integrity and hopefully lessen the likelihood of war by providing an accessible, pragmatic, clinical science of truth.
This book returns to focusing on the individual and studying the experiential subjective blocks to the advancement of consciousness that leads to progressive spiritual awareness and on to higher levels of consciousness preparatory to advanced states such as Enlightenment itself. The material is drawn from multiple sources, including fifty years of psychiatric practice; psychoanalysis; twenty-five years of research into the nature of consciousness; and transformative, subjective spiritual experiences that have been described elsewhere.
In this book, as in previous ones, the calibrated levels of major statements are included.
Note that due to more recent discoveries in the evolving field of consciousness research, the instructions for doing the muscle test have been revised and updated (see
Appendix B
).

INTRODUCTION
The all-pervasive universal energy field called consciousness is of infinite power and dimension beyond time and is compositionally nonlinear. It is the ‘light of the world’ as it emanates from the Unmanifest to the Manifest, from the nonlinear, infinite potentiality to its linear expression as the unfolding of Creation (the circumscribed, perceived physical domain).
The power of the infinite field of consciousness and its infinite potentiality manifests as matter. Later, the interface of the Light of Divinity as the field of consciousness in its encounter with matter results in the emergence of the unique quality and energy of life itself. Although matter has enormous potentiality, it lacks the innate quality or power to evolve to the field of existence termed ‘life’. Matter plus evolution results in the dimension of ‘time’. Then, matter plus time is expressed as ‘space’, subsequent to which the existence of time, space, and matter is discernible by intelligence, an aspect of Divinity expressed as Life. That life emanates solely as a consequence of Divinity is confirmable at consciousness level 1,000, the level of the Absolute.
Creation is capable of being known solely by virtue of the presence of consciousness, which is the very matrix of existence itself.Thus, consciousness is the irreducible a priori reality by which the linear is perceived by the subjective awareness of the nonlinear.
Consciousness then evolves through progressive levels of power that can be calibrated as to relative strength, much as is done with a light meter or any other measurement of energy waves, whether kinetic, radio, or magnetic components of the well-known stratifications called the electromagnetic spectrum.
In the 1970s, a clinical science emerged based on the use of life energy and its interaction with the infinite field of consciousness itself. This resulted in the calibrated levels of the Map of Consciousness that has subsequently become well known worldwide as a consequence of its presentation in a series of books in many languages and numerous lectures in the United States, Canada, Asia, and Europe.
The designated levels were stratified in accordance with their numerical, calibrated levels of power according to a logarithmic scale from ‘1’ (indicating existence) to the highest level at ‘1,000’, which is the highest energy field possible in the human domain and reached by only the few throughout history who have traditionally been referred to as the Great Avatars (the founders of the world’s great religions, such as Jesus Christ, Buddha, Zoroaster, and Krishna), and who were enlightened by the Divine Presence that replaced the linear, limited, ordinary human mind with the nonlinear Reality. The Self, indicative of the presence of the Divine as immanent, is sometimes referred to in classical literature as Universal Mind. By transcendence, the ego-self is replaced by the non-ego Self (see Hawkins, 1995, 2001, 2003). This phenomenon has been traditionally termed ‘Enlightenment’.
The emergence of a clinical science of truth has been described in previous works. One important statement about the infinite field of consciousness is that it represents the Absolute by which all else can be calibrated as to degrees of being relative to it. The mechanism is the living clinical science of muscle testing, which uses the human nervous system and the
energy of life as expressed through the acupuncture energy system as the requisite sensitive biological measuring instrument. (The technique cannot be duplicated by nonliving scientific instruments.) In the presence of Truth, the body’s musculature goes ‘strong’. In contrast, it goes ‘weak’ when confronted with falsehood (which is the absence of truth, not its opposite). This is a rapid and transitory response that quickly reveals the degree of truth of the presented stimulus.
The infinitely powerful, all-present timeless field of consciousness is comparable to an electrostatic field that is motionless unless triggered by the challenge of a presenting electrical charge that then activates the electrostatic field, which responds with an equal and opposite charge to precisely the same degree. The electrostatic field, in and of itself, does not ‘do’ anything but merely responds and records.
Unlike the electrostatic field, the timeless field of consciousness is permanent and thereby records all that has occurred or existed from within time/space/evolution. The field itself stands beyond time, space, or any known dimension and instead includes all dimensions, without being altered by them. The infinite field is omnipresent, omnipotent, omniscient, and uniquely identifiable as the Absolute by which all expressions of evolution or existence can be compared.
Everything in the universe, including even a passing thought, is recorded forever in the timeless field of consciousness, which is everywhere equally present. All that has ever occurred, either physically or by thought, is equally available because the field is beyond time and space. There is no ‘here’ or ‘there’; there is no ‘now’ or ‘then’. The totality is equally and permanently present everywhere.
The Map of Consciousness is therefore a very practical and pragmatic guide to understanding the evolutionary levels of consciousness to be transcended in pursuit of spiritual advancement, enlightenment, or self-improvement. It also provides a pragmatic map of the obstacles to overcome in order to achieve more optimal levels of consciousness. Calibrations do not establish truth but merely confirm it and lend additional corroboration.

MAP OF THE SCALE OF CONSCIOUSNESS
®

Section One
Calibration Levels Below 200 The Ego
Overview:
The Evolution of Consciousness
Chapter 1
Shame
(Cal. Level 20)
Chapter 2
Guilt/Hate
(Cal. Level 30)
Chapter 3
Apathy
(Cal. Level 50)
Chapter 4
Grief
(Cal. Level 75)
Chapter 5
Fear
(Cal. Level 100)
Chapter 6
Desire
(Cal. Level 125)
Chapter 7
Anger
(Cal. Level 150)
Chapter 8
Pride
(Cal. Level 175)

Section One – Overview
The Evolution of Consciousness
To understand the calibrated levels of consciousness, it is helpful to recapitulate the emergence of consciousness on the planet and its evolution through the animal kingdom into its expression as humankind. The initial focus of interest is the evolution of the ego, with its innate limitations. The term ‘ego’ has a different meaning in spiritual work than it has in psychology, psychoanalysis, and the theories of Carl Jung or Sigmund Freud. The differences will be clarified later.
The ego is not overcome by seeing it as an enemy. It is one’s biological inheritance, and without it, nobody would be alive to lament its limitations. By understanding its origin and intrinsic importance to survival, the ego can be seen as being of great benefit but prone to becoming unruly and causing emotional, psychological, and spiritual problems if not resolved or transcended.
From the Unmanifest to the Manifest, the energy of consciousness itself interacted with matter, and as an expression of Divinity, by that interaction life arose. In its earliest forms, the animal expressions of life were very primitive and did not have an innate, inner source of energy. Survival therefore depended on acquiring energy externally. This was not a problem in the plant kingdom where chlorophyll automatically transforms solar energy into necessary chemical processes. Animal life had to acquire what was needed from its environment, and that principle then established the main core of the ego, which is still primarily involved in self-interest, acquisition, conquering, and rivalry with other organisms for survival. Importantly, however, it also had the characteristics of curiosity, searching, and, therefore, learning.
As evolution progressed, the survival mechanisms became more elaborate as the quality of intelligence, by which information is acquired, stored, processed, compared, integrated, correlated, and stratified. This observation is the basis for the theory of ‘Intelligent Design’, which does not require any presumption of Divinity or a Creator. It confirms that an innate quality of the energy of life is that through experience, it acquires information and is capable of processing it in a progressive integration and in stratifications of increasing complexity.
Life then evolved into progressively higher life forms, and if this is charted over great evolutionary epics of time, its expression in the animal kingdom becomes apparent. (Reprinted here from
Truth vs. Falsehood
for convenience.)
It is noticeable that at consciousness levels below 200 (with the exception of most birds), life could be described as rapacious. It acquires its energy at the expense of others, and because survival is based on acquisition, it sees others as rivals, competitors, and enemies. Life up to consciousness level 200 is therefore strongly rivalrous and self-interested. Because it sees others as potential enemies, in modern languaging it would be called possessive, competitive, hostile, and, in extreme expressions, aggressive and savage.
At consciousness level 200, there is a shift to the more benign, that is, in addition to the carnivore, there emerges the herbivore. From consciousness level 200 up, the nature of life becomes more harmonious. Maternal caring appears, along with concern for others, pack loyalty, identification with others, and the beginning of what is later expressed in human nature as relatedness, socializing, play, family and pair bonding, and group cooperation for shared goals, such as survival via community activities.
Animal Kingdom
Bacteria
1
Protozoa
2
Crustaceans
3
Insects
6
Arachnids
7
Amphibians
17
Fish
20
Octopus
20
Sharks
24
Vipers
35
Komodo dragon
40
Reptiles
40
Predatory mammals (hyena, lion, tiger)
40
Snakes
45
Alligators
45
Dinosaurs
60
Whales
85
Dolphins
95
Migratory birds
105
Birds of prey
105
Rodents
105
Rhinoceros
105
Baboons
105
Song birds
125
Doves
145
Polar bear
160
Grizzly bear
160
Water buffalo
175
Black bear
180
Jackal, foxes
185
Wolves
190
Hippopotamus
190
Javelina
195
Grazers (zebra, gazelle, giraffe)
200
Deer
205
Bison
205
Domestic pig
205
Elk
210
Dairy cow
210
Sheep
210
Range cattle
210
Elephants
210
Monkeys
210
Farm horse
240
Cats
240
Parrot, African gray
240
Family cat
245
Race horse
245
Dogs
245
Family pig
250
Black crow
250
Gorilla
275
Chimpanzees
305
Exceptions:
Alex, trained African gray
401
Koko (trained gorilla)
405
Song bird’s song
500
Cat’s purr
500
Dog’s wagging tail
500
With the advancement of evolution, the bipeds appeared with two limbs that they did not need for locomotion so, standing upright, the two free limbs developed manual dexterity and, as a consequence of the development of the thumb, were enabled to develop tool-making crafts.
The increased complexity was facilitated by the emergence of the forebrain and the prefrontal cortex as the anatomical seat of human intelligence. However, because of the predominance of animal instincts, intelligence initially served primitive instincts. Thus, the prefrontal cortex became subservient to animal-survival motivations. As is apparent from even casual observation, evolution represents Creation, and the basic quality of Creation is evolution because they are one and the same thing.
Primitive man appeared as sprouts of the evolutionary tree, starting presumably with “Lucy” three million years ago, and then much later as Neanderthal, Cro-Magnon, Homo erectus, and others, all of whom calibrated at approximately 80 to 85. Most recently, perhaps 600,000 years ago, there appeared in Africa the probable predecessor of modern man,
Homo sapiens idelta
, with consciousness level also at 80 to 85.
The persistence of the primitive ego in man is referred to as the narcissistic core of ‘egotism’, which, at calibration levels below 200, indicates the persistence of the primitiveness of self-interest, disregard for the rights of others, and seeing others as enemies and competitors rather than as allies. For safety’s sake, humans coalesced into groups and discovered the benefit of mutuality and cooperation, which again was a corollary to the animal world of group, pack, and family formation in the mammalian and bird kingdoms.
The calibrated consciousness level of humans evolved slowly. At the time of the birth of the Buddha, the collective consciousness of all of mankind calibrated at 90. It then rose to 100 by the time of the birth of Jesus Christ and slowly evolved over the last two millennia to 190, where it stayed for many centuries, until the late 1980s. Then, at about the time of the Harmonic Convergence in the late 1980s, it suddenly jumped from 190 to 204-205, where it stayed until November 2003, when again, it suddenly jumped from 205 to its current level of 207. At the present time, approximately seventy-eight percent of all humanity calibrates below consciousness level 200, although that figure is only forty-nine percent in America. The significance is that the consciousness level of close to eighty percent of the world’s population is still below 200 and therefore dominated by primitive animal instincts, motivations, and behaviors (as reflected in the nightly news).
Of major significance on the calibrated Scale of Consciousness (see below) is that the critical level of 200 differentiates truth from falsehood. Therefore, levels over 200, which progress logarithmically, indicate levels of power, and those below 200 indicate reliance on force, whether emotional, physical, social, or by whatever expression. This differentiation is denoted by the dictum that the pen (ideology) is mightier than the sword (force).
Of major significance is that the brain’s physiology also changes dramatically at consciousness level 200, which is the level where the quality of life changes, not only in man but also in the animal kingdom, from predatory to benign. This is expressed by the emergence of concern for the welfare, survival, and happiness of others rather than just for the personal self. The benefits of the evolution of caringness and spiritual growth are clearly shown in the following chart.

Correlation of Levels of Consciousness and the Rate of Happiness
LEVEL
LOG
PERCENT
Enlightenment
700-1,000
100
Peace
600
100
Joy
570
99
Unconditional Love
540
96
Love
500
89
Reason
400
79
Acceptance
350
71
Willingness
310
68
Neutrality
250
60
Courage
200
55
Pride
175
22
Anger
150
12
Desire
125
10
Fear
100
10
Grief
75
9
Apathy, hatred
50
5
Guilt
30
4
Shame
20
1
The dynamics of the ego will be investigated in each of the following chapters as they apply to a specific level, thereby clarifying the subject in greater detail.

CHAPTER 1
Shame: Despair
(Calibration Levels 20 and Below)
Introduction
This level is perilously proximate to death, which may be chosen as conscious suicide or more subtly elected by failure to take steps to prolong life. Death by neglect, indifference, carelessness, or accident is common at this level. Everyone is aware of the pain of ‘losing face’, becoming discredited, or of seeming to be a ‘non-person.’ In Shame, people hang their heads and slink away, wishing they were invisible. Banishment is a traditional accompaniment of shame, and in the primitive societies from which humankind originates, banishment is equivalent to death. It is the basis of the fear of disapproval, rejection, or failure.
Early life experiences such as neglect or physical, emotional, or sexual abuse lead to shame and warp the personality for a lifetime unless these issues are later resolved. Shame, as Freud determined, produces neurosis. It is destructive to emotional and psychological health and, as a consequence of low self-esteem, makes one prone to the development of physical illness. The shame-based personality is shy, withdrawn, introverted, and self-deprecating.
Shame is used as a tool of cruelty, and its victims often become cruel. Shamed children are cruel to animals and cruel to each other. The behavior of people whose consciousness is only in the 20s is dangerous. They are prone to hallucinations of an accusatory nature, as well as paranoia, and some become psychotic or commit bizarre crimes.
Some shame-based individuals compensate by perfectionism and rigidity, becoming driven and intolerant. Notorious examples of this are the moral extremists who form vigilante groups, projecting their own unconscious shame onto others whom they then feel justified in righteously attacking. Serial killers have often acted out of shame, hate, and sexual moralism with the justification of punishing ‘bad’ women. Because it pulls down the whole level of personality, Shame results in a vulnerability to the other negative emotions, therefore often producing false pride, anger, and guilt.
Clinical
Severe depression is a serious level of consciousness that can be immobilizing and life threatening. It occurs not only in individuals but also in most of the large groups of people who die of apathy or even suicide.
Despair is characterized by helplessness and hopelessness and is therefore described as a dispirited state and hellish to endure. The will to live is lost, but in the deepest depths, even the act of suicide is not possible due to lack of energy. Passive suicide occurs through the failure to eat or provide for physical necessities. Paradoxically, as the person comes out of the severe apathy of depression and gains more energy, they then become capable of the act of suicide, which explains the misunderstood clinical paradox that, supposedly, antidepressants ‘cause’ suicide, especially in children and teenagers. This phenomenon was well known clinically over great periods of time long before antidepressants became available. When the apathetic depressive begins to improve, the phase of agitated depression emerges in which the energy to carry out suicide exists. Many years ago, before antidepressants, patients were placed on close watch during the periods when they had ‘improved’ from apathy to the agitated state (Hawkins, 2005).
Shame is also reflective of self-hatred that, when turned outward, can result in severe, even homicidal aggression. It is notable that a sizeable percent of senseless classmate killers were reportedly on antidepressants.
Depression is accompanied by major changes in brain physiology and low levels of critical neurotransmitters, such as norepinephrine and serotonin. The propensity to depression includes strong genetic and karmic factors and is often familial. It is also correlated with vulnerability to alcoholism. It is estimated that at least one-third of adults will have a serious or moderately severe degree of depression at sometime in their lives.
Clinically, depression usually necessitates professional help. To complicate it further, it is also difficult to differentiate true suicidality from the relatively more frequent suicidal gestures or threats that arise from a different problem, usually involving interpersonal relationships and resentments.
Depressions of a serious degree can be worked through under appropriate conditions, but they are really indicative of the need for psychiatric or other professional clinical help, as well as protection and support. The loss of hope and the will to live, along with the accompanying depression, frequently occur in lonely isolated persons, the elderly, and in ordinary people who have gone through the psychological depletion of severe stress, such as divorce, financial disaster, loss of loved ones, and the process of grieving itself. Suicide is a leading cause of death in adolescents.
Like other illnesses, major emotional problems are comprised of physical, mental, and emotional components. There may also be additional interpersonal and social factors as well as karmic influences. Recovery may require addressing any or all of the factors. Even a seemingly simple physical problem such as undiagnosed functional hypoglycemia may be a major contributor. (Many depressives have recovered simply by avoiding sugar.) Failure to seek or accept appropriate help is frequently due to pride (spiritual), denial (psychological), or simply ignorance (karmic). The mood fluctuations then affect interpersonal relations and even employment (e.g., workplace homicides and rages). With humility, all the contributing factors can be examined, and recovery from even very serious, near-fatal conditions can be achieved, as is seen in spiritually-based recovery groups.
The Attraction of Death
Although there is the common presumption that everyone fears death and has an aversion to it, paradoxically, death is also, under appropriate conditions, seen as an attraction (the end of suffering) or as a final act of revenge, heroic sacrifice, or an extreme acting out of self-pity. There is also ‘the romance of death’ by which it is celebrated for its intrinsic drama (legends, opera, and fiction, such as
Romeo and Juliet
).
The thrill of death pervades the Roman Coliseum, dueling, the racetrack, and acts of war. To ‘flirt with death’ is also an attraction of high risk-taking (e.g., as represented by motorcyclists’ jackets and tattoos with skull and crossbones).
Death can also be ceremonial (hari-kari) and is solemnly celebrated via funerals with the casket drawn slowly by horses in State funeral processions.
Freud postulated an intrinsic death instinct termed ‘Thanatos’ (in contrast to ‘eros’, the life instinct) that is buried deep in the primitive unconscious where it exerts a potential influence that can be strengthened by indoctrination (kamikaze pilots, Islamic suicide bombers, cult mass suicide). Currently there is a long waiting list of zealous volunteers among Islamic extremists (“We worship death, not life,” said bin Laden.) There is therefore the ‘Cult of Death,’ which is glamorized to impressionable, naïve youth who are induced to commit not only suicide but also simultaneous mass murder of the innocent. There were numerous kamikaze volunteers during World War II. Thus, a dramatic exit has a unique attraction and the glamour of drama. Most commonly, suicide is an act of despair and desperation consequent to the loss of faith or hope.
Spiritual: The Dark Night of the Soul
The state of feeling abandoned by God and being hopeless results in a global feeling of depression and may include an alteration of the experience of time comparable to the experiential lower levels of Hell as described by Dante: “Abandon hope all ye who enter here.” This state may also be a transitory phase as a consequence of intense inner spiritual work, especially in a devotee who throws all caution to the wind and explores the deepest levels of consciousness, at which depth the devotee intuitively senses that it is necessary to relinquish the ego and remove all doubt. Thus, this state may represent the need to reach inner validation of spiritual truth before total abandonment of the ego itself. Oddly, this can be the very route taken by the devoted atheist who is proving whether actual Godlessness is true or even survivable. Severe spiritual depression can represent the last toehold of the ego as it fights for survival. The ego’s basic illusion is that it is God and that without it, death will occur. Thus, what is described as ‘the dark night of the soul’ is actually the dark night for the ego.
Confrontation with the core of the ego may be unexpected and the consequence of letting go of attachments, along with the ego’s illusions and cherished false spiritual/religious beliefs and fantasies about God, e.g., God will respond to intense entreaty or bargaining (‘rattling the gates of Heaven’): “O God, look how I suffer for thee.”
Paradoxically, the dark night of the soul is often a sign of significant spiritual progress for it is not really the soul (higher Self) but the ego that is in the dark. Some comfort can be obtained by recalling the spiritual dictum that one can only go as high as they have been low, or that Jesus Christ sweat blood in Gethsemane, or that the Buddha reported that he felt as though his bones were being broken and he was being attacked by demons.
In the pits of spiritual despair and black hopelessness, the necessary Knowingness to be followed is that, spiritually, all fear is illusion. The reason it is safe to let go completely of all that one holds dear, along with the belief that the inner core of the ego is the very source of life itself, is because it is
not
the source, no matter how intensely the experience may seem. The last barrier to relinquish and turn over to God is the seeming irreducible substrate of the core of existence itself. The reason it is safe do so is because that is not true.
With the surrender of what seems to be the very source, irreducible core, and essence of one’s life, the door swings open when karmically appropriate, and the Presence shines forth with the Radiance of Divinity. The personal ‘I’, along with the mind, dissolves into the Infinite ‘I’ of the Eternal, with its profound peace and state of Oneness beyond all time. This state is not a consequence of the mind or the ego but rather the replacement when they cease to function. The final steps take courage, conviction, and surrender at great depth. It is here where Truth in the form of the vibration and the aura of a true teacher is of maximal assistance (the historical ‘grace of the guru’), as is the calling upon one’s chosen master, Savior, or ultimate spiritual reality, be it Buddha, Christ, Krishna, or God directly.
Another form of the dark night of the soul arises as a consequence of experientially falling from a high state (such as devotional joy or ecstasy), as has been well described in the lives of the Christian saints. It is as though one has been ‘deserted by the Beloved’. (See
Butler’s Lives of the Saints
.) This may arise because one has ‘used up their good karma’, subsequent to which the remainder of karmic attachments and proclivities surface to be processed out and surrendered to God. Some of these are deep, such as self-hatred, resentments of God, and cherished beliefs that are often attached to beliefs about suffering itself (e.g., that it will leverage God’s favor, etc.).
In the dark night of the soul, faith in certain beliefs is pitted against the actual Reality. All beliefs about God are second-hand information derived from others and handed down, and thus, even these have to be surrendered. The reason for this can be found by examining the analogy of the fact that only a cat truly knows what it is to be a cat by virtue of being a cat. It does not know ‘about’ being a cat and has no belief systems. Therefore, all erroneous beliefs about God are extraneous to the experiential Reality. The door to Enlightenment is through the deep honesty of unknowingness.
The experience of Divinity within as Self, or God Immanent, is quite different from belief in God Transcendent. It is for this reason that the Buddha counseled against all depictions or nominalizations of God because Enlightenment is a condition or state in which the Self-knowing is that of Identity. In this condition or state, there is no ‘this’, such as self, with which to describe the Self. The condition or state is best described as Self-effulgent, and in that state the Knowingness is its own Reality. (The subject is revisited in later chapters.)
Although the term ‘karma’ is not used specifically in Western religions, it is nevertheless a basic reality as it is spiritual accountability that determines the fate of the soul after death. The term also includes the spiritual problems that are inherent to being a human being, including the fact that humankind is characterized by limited spiritual understanding (‘ignorance’). Thus, the purpose of human life is to overcome and transcend these inherited limitations via spiritual truth as revealed by the great religious and spiritual teachers.
‘Karma’ is often confused in the Western mind with rebirth, reincarnation, or multiple human lifetimes. Generically, karma merely refers to the fact that the soul is evolutionary in both origin and fate and accountable for its decisions.
Everyone already has a specific calibrated level of consciousness at birth. Pragmatically, how the condition came about could be viewed as irrelevant. The various religions, as well as consciousness research, offer different explanations. Whatever the reasons may be, each individual has to proceed from wherever they find themselves in the evolutionary process. Without an understanding of karma, however, individual circumstances would seem to be accidental or capricious and thus not in accord with the findings of consciousness research that demonstrate that all Creation is a reflection of Divine Harmony, Justice, and Balance.
Karmic Despair
Karmic despair is often experienced via major tragic events or catastrophes. There is also the collective human group karma that is merely the consequence of being human. It may also be expressed as group conditions that may be ethnic, religious, geographic, or aligned in other ways due to acts or agreements in the past. Karma is linear, propagates via the soul, and is inherited as the consequence of significant acts of the will. The likelihood of such seemingly negative consequences can readily be deduced from human history, which frequently and recurrently involved useless slaughter of the innocent as well as willful and wanton acts of desecration (i.e., negative karma).
Inclusion in what seems to be negative karmic consequences occurs as a result of prior concurrence and/or participation. Thus, the cheers at the death of a gladiator are karmically significant as is taking grim satisfaction from pain and suffering or the death of others. To cheer on the implementation of the guillotine is to join with its karmic consequences. To take justice into one’s own hands is done at karmic risk for “Justice is mine, sayeth the Lord.” Faith that Divinity guarantees absolute justice is difficult to accept in a world of seeming injustices. It is better to trust in the absolute justice of God and “judge not, lest ye be judged,” for it is well to remember that “Let he who is without sin cast the first stone.”
A useful analogy to Divine Justice (Laws of Karma) is the realization that the infinite omnipresent and omniscient field of consciousness is itself the Radiance of Divinity in which all passing events, no matter how seemingly trivial, are recorded. At birth, one is automatically aligned with the overall karmic field as a consequence of the quality of that linear field in the infinite field of consciousness itself. Thus, only by acts of the will can an entity bring about its own fate. One’s consciousness calibration is affected for better or worse by inner decision and act of the will, and as a consequence, the individual entity is drawn to its own appropriate level of consciousness, which is dominated by an ‘attractor field’ (see
Power vs. Force
, 1995). Thus, one’s level of consciousness represents karmic inheritance.
From an overall understanding of the nature of consciousness, it can be seen that justice (karma) is automatic as a consequence of the interaction of the vibration of the soul within the overall infinite field of consciousness. The science of truth and consciousness calibration research confirm the scriptural passage, “Every hair on one’s head is counted” (numbered). All is known by the infinite field of Divinity by which justice therefore automatically prevails. Mankind’s fantasies are projections from the unconscious of an anthropomorphic god who is vengeful, jealous, wrathful, and the alleged ‘cause’ of disasters. However, it is obvious that natural disasters of greater proportion than have happened during the history of mankind occurred before man even existed and are, in fact, presumed to have been the condition that brought about the termination of the age of the dinosaur.
To summarize, as is commonly known, karma (spiritual fate) is the consequence of decisions of the will and determines spiritual destiny after physical death (the celestial levels, hells, purgatory, or the so-called inner astral planes
[bardos]
). Included also is the option of reincarnation in the human physical domain, which, by consciousness calibration research, can only be done by agreement with the individual will. Thus, all humans have, by agreement, chosen this pathway. In addition, consciousness research confirms that all persons are born under the most optimal conditions for spiritual evolution, no matter what the appearance seems to be.
Karma really means accountability, and, as cited in previous spiritual research, every entity is answerable to the universe. It is also well known that positive karma (good works, prayer, selfless service, benevolent acts, etc.) can compensate for and undo negative (‘bad’) karma. In this process, ‘merit’ accrues, which at times can even be drawn against in confronting vicissitudes. Spiritual progress ensues automatically from choosing good will, forgiveness, and lovingness as a way of being in the world at large rather than viewing it as a gain-seeking transaction.
Working through one’s ‘karma’ includes not only this lifetime but historical, long-forgotten evolutionary aspects as well. Spiritual work may bring up repressed attitudes, thoughts, or beliefs from the personal unconscious, as well as aspects of the collective human unconscious that are energetically aligned analogously to the chakra system of the Jungian archetypes (e.g., the heart of the child, the spleen of the warrior, the naïveté of the adolescent, etc.). Due to the nature of human development, even a mature, intelligent, fully-grown adult still has repressed or forgotten, but still functional, infantile and childish drives that operate out of awareness. One of the most common is the out-of-awareness balance between the ‘good me’ and the ‘bad me.’ (This is the area of the split and compartmentalized Jekyll-and-Hyde personality disorders.) The good/bad dichotomy may be the source of multiple psychological difficulties, of which projecting the ‘bad me’ onto others is the most common.
Group: Catastrophe, Regional, and Situational
Severe poverty, deprivations, and starvation are geographically endemic to whole regions, cultures, and major areas of the world, as described and graphed in a prior work (
Truth vs. Falsehood
, Chapter 14). They are characterized by high birth and infant mortality rates, short life spans, high rates of disease, civil disorders, tribal-type warfare, cruelty, and mass slaughter.
Consciousness research confirms that regional endemic poverty is of group karmic origin and expresses itself in correlation with genetic transmission.
Early forms of hominids (calibration level 85-90) have come and gone, and Homo sapiens, from an evolutionary viewpoint, is only a very recent emergence from the evolutionary tree. At this time, in fact, the majority of the human population (seventy-eight percent) calibrates below 200, which therefore initiates and attracts experiences in accord with that level.
Each calibrated level of consciousness indicates progress beyond the levels below it and may also represent the level to which those who were once higher have fallen as a consequence of volitional choices. This descending level is well documented in the cases of very famous political leaders who started out as integrous and idealistic, calibrating in the 400s, and who later, as a consequence of the development of megalomania, crashed to very low numbers (Napoleon, Hitler, et al.). The same phenomenon occurs in ordinary individuals as well as in groups, such as Easter Island and other societies that have come and gone.
What is commonly known as negative karma is sometimes referred to as ‘debt’, e.g., “Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.” Although decisions of the will have karmic consequences, they are recoverable with appropriate spiritual alignment and dedication.
As people evolve spiritually, each ascended level has its corollary tests or temptations into which the unwary may fall. Of these, the best known, of course, are wealth, power, and prestige (pride goeth before the fall; power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely, etc.). This is clinically described as the ‘Lucerific Temptation’ of power for its own sake or power over others. The source of the error is ascribing the source of power to the ego ‘I’ instead of to Divinity. Similar falls are exhibited in the secular world where corporate CEOs seem to lose all sense of reality and succumb to the greed of unlimited power. Shame is also the consequence of the abuse of spiritual/religious status and influence as seen in the catastrophes of fallen gurus who once had worldwide acclaim and vast wealth.
Much of the world’s literature includes fables, such as those of the old Greek and Germanic gods, as well as those of the Old Testament and other religions that were later superseded by the development of monotheism. That spiritual work can be arduous is attested to by the recorded histories of Christian saints. Many of them are aptly described, as in the Temptation of St. Anthony and the Confessions of St. Augustine. The Buddha also described how he was attacked by illusions and the negative ‘demon’ energies of
Mara
(illusion).
From previous studies, it was learned that everyone is born under optimal conditions for karmic opportunities; therefore, it is wise to judge not, for what appears as misery or catastrophe may be the doorway to liberation for those who have negative karma to undo. Thus, seemingly catastrophic events may be the very essential and necessary elements for the evolution of the soul.
Transcendence
At the bottom of despair, there is the exhaustion of energy and of even the will to survive. It is often only in the very pits of Hell and absolute despair that the ego can be surrendered, even right up to the point of imminent physical death. In extreme, timeless agony, the soul may entreat, “If there is a God, I ask him for help,” and a great transformation occurs. This confirms the truth of the Zen teaching, “Heaven and hell are only one-tenth of an inch apart.” Bizarrely, the ego may reach this point as an attempt to make God wrong, including even one’s physical death (the ego will grasp at any straw), and thus, even in the last moment, the ego struggles to prove that death is a reality and that God is not.
The Dualities of Shame
Shame is a consequence of the negation of the realities of both self and Self. It is transitory in normal life but denotes a very major obstacle to spiritual evolution as a prevailing level of consciousness, and when severe, even threatens physical survival.
THE DUALITIES OF SHAME
Attraction
Aversion
Self-punitive
Self-forgiveness
Depression
Choose life
Judgmental
Surrender to God’s Mercy
Negativity
Let go of position
Shrink, hide
Be visible
Self as worthless
Affirm gift of life
Rigid self-view
Correctable, flexible
Condemn
Forgive
Mortification
Choose self-worth
Denigrate
Honor self
Self-hatred
Self-forgiveness
Severe
Benign
Imbalanced
See both sides
Blame self
Blame ego’s ignorance
Exaggerate faults
Transcend limitations
Partial selective view
Balanced overall view
Self as loser
Self as corrected
End of the road
Beginning of the new
Unlovable
Worth as child of God
Error unforgivable
Error as lesson
Narcissistic orientation
Concern for others
Serve self
Serve life
Indulgent self-evaluation
Let go of egoistic position
Self as center of life
Self as participant in life
Focus on self
Focus on others
‘Should have’
Was not able then

CHAPTER 2
Guilt and Vindictive Hate
(Calibration Level 30)
Introduction
Guilt, so commonly used in the form of blame by our society to manipulate and punish, manifests itself in a variety of expressions, such as remorse, self-recrimination, masochism, and the whole gamut of symptoms of victimhood. Unconscious guilt results in psychosomatic disease, accident proneness, and suicidal behaviors. Many people struggle with guilt their entire lives, while others desperately attempt to escape it by amorally denying guilt altogether.
Guilt domination results in preoccupation with ‘sin’, an unforgiving emotional attitude frequently exploited by religious demagogues who use it for coercion and control. Such ‘sin and salvation’ merchants, obsessed with punishment, are likely either acting out their own guilt or projecting it onto others.
Subcultures displaying the aberration of self-flagellation often manifest other endemic forms of cruelty, such as the public ritual killing of animals. Guilt provokes rage, and killing is frequently its expression. Capital punishment is an example of how killing gratifies an angry and guilt-ridden populace, but it has never been demonstrated to have any deterrent or corrective value. Instead, it satisfies the emotional need for ‘just’ retribution.
Clinical
Th

... [truncated]