Free e-Newsletters
from Hay House, the Ultimate
Resource for Inspiration
Be the first to know about Hay House’s dollar deals, free downloads, special offers, affirmation cards, giveaways, contests and more!
Get exclusive excerpts from our latest releases and videos from
Hay House Present Moments
.
Enjoy uplifting personal stories, how-to articles and healing advice along with videos and empowering quotes within
Heal Your Life
.
Have an uplifting story to tell and a passion for writing? Sharpen your writing skills with insider tips from
Your Writing Life
.
Sign Up
Now!
Get inspired, educate
yourself, get a complimentary
gift, and share the wisdom!
http://www.hayhouse.com/newsletters.php
Visit
www.hayhouse.com
to sign-up today

ALSO BY DAVID R. HAWKINS, M.D., PH.D.
Dissolving the Ego, Realizing the Self
Along the Path to Enlightenment
Letting Go
Healing and Recovery
Reality, Spirituality, and Modern Man
Discovery of the Presence of God: Devotional Nonduality
Transcending the Levels of Consciousness: The Stairway to Enlightenment
I: Reality and Subjectivity
The Eye of the I: From Which Nothing Is Hidden
Power vs. Force: The Hidden Determinants of Human Behavior
Dialogues on Consciousness and Spirituality
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis and Calibration of the Levels of Human Consciousness
Orthomolecular Psychiatry
(with Linus Pauling)
Please visit:
Hay House USA:
®www.hayhouse.com
®
Hay House Australia:
www.hayhouse.com.au
Hay House UK:
www.hayhouse.co.uk
Hay House south Africa:
www.hayhouse.co.za
Hay House India:
www.hayhouse.co.in

Copyright © 2005 by David R. Hawkins
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following previously published material:
“10 Qualities That Define Us As Americans,” by Mantoshe Singh Devji, which originally appeared in the
Arizona Republic,
3 July 2004. Copyright © Mantoshe Singh Devji. Used by permission.
Published and distributed in the United States by:
Hay House, Inc.:
www.hayhouse.com®
•
Published and distributed in Australia by:
Hay House Australia Pty. Ltd.:
www.hayhouse.com.au
•
Published and distributed in the United Kingdom by:
Hay House UK, Ltd.:
www.hayhouse.co.uk
•
Published and distributed in the Republic of South Africa by:
Hay House SA (Pty), Ltd.:
www.hayhouse.co.za
•
Distributed in Canada by:
Raincoast:
www.raincoast.com
•
Published in India by:
Hay House Publishers India:
www.hayhouse.co.in
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.
The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, which is your constitutional right, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.
Previously published by Axial Publishing Company (ISBN 0-97150073-8)
Library of Congress Control Number for the printed edition:
2013947043
Tradepaper ISBN:
978-1-4019-4506-0
16 15 14 13 4 3 2 1
1st Hay House edition, 2013
Printed in the United States of America

Enslavement by illusion is comfortable;
it is the liberation by Truth that people fear.
Straight and narrow is the path …
Waste no time.
Gloria in Excelsis Deo!

Table of Contents
Author’s Statement
Caveat: A Note to the Reader
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Section I What is Truth?
Chapter 1   Historical Perspective
Chapter 2   The Science of Truth
Chapter 3   Truth as Enigma: The Challenge and the Struggle
Chapter 4   The Evolution of Consciousness
Chapter 5   The Essential Structure of Truth
Chapter 6   Manifestation versus Causality: Creation Versus Evolution
Chapter 7   The Physiology of Truth
Chapter 8   Fact versus Fiction: Reality and Illusion
Section II Practical Applications
Chapter 9   Social Structure and Functional Truth
Chapter 10 America
Chapter 11 The Downside of Society
Chapter 12 Problematic Issues
Section III Truth and the World
Chapter 13 Truth: The Pathway to Freedom
Chapter 14 Countries and Politics
Chapter 15 Truth and War
Section IV Higher Consciousness and Truth
Chapter 16 Religion and Truth
Chapter 17 Spiritual Truth
Chapter 18 Summary and Resolution
Appendices
Appendix A  Calibration of the Truth of the Chapters
Appendix B  Map of the Scale of Consciousness
Appendix C  How to Calibrate the Levels of Consciousness
Appendix D  Movies
Appendix E  Index of Calibration Tables and Illustrations
Appendix F  References
About the Author, Biographical and Autobiographical Notes

Author’s Statement
The work to be presented is the result of a lifetime dedicated to discovering the core and essence of Truth itself and how it can be recognized, expressed, and defined. As a consequence, a means of discerning truth from falsehood was discovered that was shocking in its implications, for it revealed not only the nature of the essence of truth but also that this technique was applicable, without limits, to anything and everything, anywhere in time or space.
Until now, humanity has been like a sailor at sea without a compass by which to discern truth from falsehood. The cost in terms of suffering has been enormous. Compassion for the human condition arises from the realization of the massive consequences of this inherent limitation of the human mind itself. The work herein presented is therefore devoted to overcoming this serious defect whereby falsity has been misidentified as truth.
Research indicated that truth is actually a variable relative to an absolute constant. Its degree of validity is identifiable on a calibratable scale that includes all of life in all its expressions throughout all of history. The accumulated data was overwhelming in its revelations and implications. Researchers using this new tool were like children with their first microscope, excitedly examining everything and anything in the human experience. The mass of accumulated data often revealed rather startling information. It became overwhelmingly apparent that appearance was not in accord with essence, and that the mind is basically naïve and easily deceived. Therefore, readers are forewarned that portions of the material may be disturbing and confrontational to some cherished illusions.
The work has been progressively presented in a sequence of books, video and audio recordings, workshops, and public lectures with audience participation. It has been translated and made available worldwide in more than fourteen languages. In addition, it has been presented to numerous ongoing study groups around the world, and it was peer reviewed prior to publication.
The enormous mass of data has been organized and presented in a sequence in order to facilitate comprehension across a wide spectrum of information. The subject matter is also contextualized to facilitate the awareness of intention. Seeming paradoxes dissolve with reflection, and much of the information is transformative in itself.
As with
Power vs. Force
, reading the material herein results in a progression of the reader’s level of consciousness. Therefore, what at first exposure might seem confrontational, paradoxically, it resolves into greater awareness and an expanded capacity of discernment.
Note that because our current society is overly politicized on almost every aspect of life, it is important to know that the author places value and importance in agreement with clinically derived, calibratable levels of consciousness and their accord with subjectively experienced states of consciousness whose emergence has been described elsewhere (Hawkins, 1995, 2001, 2003).
The research techniques to be described were applied, as they were in previous books, to the manuscript of this volume. The calibrated levels of important statements are cited as they arise, and the level of truth of each chapter is documented (see Appendix A).

Caveat: A Note to the Reader
Emotional reactions are personally determined by one’s inner positionalities and belief systems. They are not ‘caused’ from without or by exposure to new information. As audiences to presentations of this material have discovered, an initial response dissolves upon reflection into a broader understanding and compassion for oneself and others.
The intention of this presentation is the alleviation of suffering by virtue of replacing falsehood with truth and sharing the knowledge of how to arrive at truth on one’s own, for the pathway to its source resides within. For those who are aligned with truth, the path lights up; for those who refuse it, the path is darkened. All of us are free to choose.
On first reading, Section I may seem difficult or too academic. If so, skip to Section II, and after reading the rest of the book, Section I will be more quickly and easily grasped. People learn by different modalities—some process logically through the intellect before going to details, while others learn by familiarity and then are ready for explanations. Either way ends up at the goal of understanding and comprehension.
The reader will also note a seeming redundancy of certain key concepts. This is a purposeful pedagogical style that facilitates progressive comprehension of critical concepts which are new or unfamiliar at first reading but become obvious with subsequent representations.
Overall, the basic dictum to the information reported is that importance is not based on whether it is pleasing, but on whether it is true or false and to what degree. The reported calibrations are the result of research and are not the author’s opinion. Thus, there is no point in writing querulous letters that usually follow the format of “How come you rated walruses higher than seals,” etc. Like a calculator, the described methodology results in numbers, not subjective bias or opinion.
Extensive references are provided that give background information needed to better understand the reported research findings. The compilation of the manuscript itself took three years, including revisions, corrections, and incorporation of input from review committees and consultants, as well as feedback from a variety of experts. Thus, meticulous effort has been made to present the data with as much accuracy as possible.
The overall mission was guided by Socrates’ dictum that all human error or wrongdoing is involuntary for man can only choose what he believes at the time to be a good that will bring happiness. His only error is that he cannot discern the real good from the illusory good. This work is devoted to clarifying what is the ‘real’ and how it can be identified.
To preclude undue emotional upset, the publication of the book was delayed until information that had been discovered by prior research was revealed to the public. It was therefore decided to wait until after the 2004 elections, the Iraqi war, the United Nations scandal, Islamic terrorist training in the United States, double agents in U. S. intelligence operations, clergy pedophilia, MS-13 gang infiltration, Iran’s nuclear plans, etc., had occurred. All these events were identifiable back in 2003-2004, long before they became public news. Similarly, more could be said about events yet to surface.
Of greater importance is to describe the methodology and basic concepts that make such discoveries available to investigation, for this rather comprehensive study demonstrates that there are no longer any secrets, and truth can be instantly discovered by any integrous researcher.
Whether to reveal all that is discovered is problematic and requires reflection. The premise that occasioned the above decisions was that wisdom is the better part of valor.

Foreword
The ensuing presentation of material is unique in that it views the totality of the human experience and the evolution of life via a new and relatively recently discovered means of research. It includes new observations and understanding of not only the ordinary, supposedly objective world (nature), but also uniquely, for the first time in any research, simultaneously correlates the observations with the very means of observation itself (subjectivity). Thus, it bypasses and transcends the ages-old major source of error (duality) by means of the unity of nonduality, a rather transformational process in and of itself.
The calibrations of levels of truth were frequently startling, and, like the discovery of the x-ray, microscope, and telescope, they opened up staggeringly huge areas for investigation that had never before been accessible by any means. The dimensions of suitable subject matter expanded at an overwhelming rate, and eventually there was the realization that it could be applied to
everything
. While it could be assumed that a seminal discovery would be satisfying, in this instance, on the contrary, it was overwhelming and took years of reorientation and decision-making. Could the understanding be explained? If so, how; and, finally, should it be?
The origination of the work was the consequence of cataclysmic, subjective changes of consciousness that occurred spontaneously, beginning in early life, and then, in 1965, revealed a whole new mode of knowingness that recontextualized the very core of experiencing. The shift was basically from content to context as the central focus of awareness from which all meaning then became transformed. (See “About the Author” at the end of the book.)
The research technique also revealed itself spontaneously in that witnessing and comprehension were now from the viewpoint of totality (field) instead of a personal or limited locus of ‘personal self’. The basic instrument of experiential information processing, and even of experiencing itself, had shifted from the linear particular and limited to the nonlinear, nonpersonal quality of autonomous awareness and consciousness.
The shift and its inferred possibilities necessitated leaving a huge psychiatric practice and spending twenty years of contemplation, out of which arose the basic research reported in
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis and Calibration of the Levels of Human Consciousness
, which was the forerunner to the publication of
Power vs. Force
in 1995. This subsequently set what could only be aptly described as a whole new culture of interest, investigation, and inspiration that led to the spontaneous emergence of numerous independent study groups worldwide.
The collection and mass of material became widespread in the public domain where tens of thousands of people experimented with the new technique of calibrating the levels of consciousness of anything and everything. A widespread network of confirmation and feedback developed that was accelerated by dissemination of the information publicly by means of numerous formal lectures and workshops with public attendance and formal, recorded participant discussion and traditional question-and-answer sessions.
All the public presentations of the work have been recorded and videotaped throughout the United States as well as in the Orient (Korea) and Europe (Oxford Union). Thus, the information has been peer reviewed by many thousands of participant observers as well as by sophisticated, ongoing discussion groups.
While some of the raw data may not coincide with personal expectations, that is the anticipated response. The discovery of any new information of real significance has always provoked query and doubt and is to be expected. Data that are in conflict with personal beliefs are best handled by viewing such information as a ‘possible alternative’ rather than as ‘make wrong’, which automatically summons up ego protest or even indignation. Oddly, protest is often confirmation that a nail has been hit on the head.
Although the human mind likes to believe that it is ‘of course’ dedicated to truth, in reality, what it really seeks is confirmation of what it already believes. The ego is innately prideful and does not welcome the revelation that much of its beliefs are merely perceptual illusions. By research analysis, actually only 35 percent of the public is really interested in truth for its own sake.
The discoveries and the work itself do not spring from a personal source but are a consequence of the advancement of human consciousness, i.e., the overall climate.
In general, the calibrated numbers are rounded off to the nearest integer of 5, for example, 63 is reported as 65, 242 is reported as 240, etc. The real significance is to locate a level of consciousness relative to the overall Scale of Consciousness. More specific numbers are significant only when doing detailed research.
Some variation in numerical specifics is to be expected among different investigators and groups, but they are inherently consistent, and the variation is due to personal differences of technique (described in Appendix C). It is comparable to adjusting a barometer to different altitudes. The primary thrust of the overall approach is to know how to tell truth from falsehood, i.e., the absence of truth. Reliability depends primarily on the integrity of the questioner and the intention for asking the question. Dedication to truth itself is the rapid road to its discovery.
The first doubt block to be overcome is the startling discovery that the truth about anything whatsoever is readily available in a few seconds, just for the asking. The normal response to this discovery is disbelief, followed by paradigm shock, but then curiosity prevails. The whole universe awaits discovery on a new level of understanding, out of which arise compassion and wisdom.
The purpose of the work is long term, and the information is best assimilated by reflection, which summons forth comprehension. The numerous doubts and questions that arise have already been extensively examined, sorted, discussed, and resolved by virtue of collective intention, because if mankind really did not want to know truth, the means to its discovery would not have arisen and revealed itself on the radar screen of human discovery.

Preface
An all-pervasive crisis of credibility and integrity is currently shredding the very fabric of all levels of society. The institutions and historic bulwarks of integrity and reliability upon which society has relied over great expanses of time are under political attack, and others have fallen into disgrace and scandal on an almost daily basis. These include not only governments and world leaders but also entire dominant political ideologies, monolithic religious institutions, government agencies, federal authorities, universities, school systems, corporate giants, banking institutions, major newspapers, news channels, and the media in general.
Even the court system has become a contentious political circus, and jurists legislate from the bench while juries award huge fortunes in order to ‘make a statement’. Institutions that were founded to protect civil rights are now seen as their worst enemy and are seemingly intent upon destroying freedom as it has been known in the past.
In the criminal courts, carefully selected juries are purposely misled by fallacious argument and manipulated by histrionics and irrelevant fictions. Although distortions of truth historically have been part and parcel of the political arena, politics has degenerated from rational discussion and debate to personal vilification, overt fallacies, gross frauds, and prevarication.
Prior to our recent and current society, the fate of whole civilizations, as well as nations and cultures, was decided primarily by conquering enemies who relied solely on brute force. The same reliance on force was even adopted by religious institutions (as is currently the case in certain parts of the world), and often the conquered were given the choice of either becoming converts or being summarily executed. Force was then the predominant and ruling principle which dominated societies, and religions as theocracies perpetuated the reliance upon coercion and force, backed up by dire threats.
Because of current terrorism and zealously promoted threats to world peace, religion itself has surfaced as a focus of current public attention and discourse. The highly visible and volatile devotees of militant world religions have openly and formally declared war on the rest of the world and seek to exterminate all nonadherents to their restrictive belief systems. The egocentricity and megalomania of such extremist positions are now primary threats to the possibility of a peaceful world. The sophistry of such violent ideologies has even provoked the appearance in the Western world of naïve apologists and sympathizers who are unaware that they too are seen merely as infidels (“mushrikun”), fools, and ‘useful idiots’ (Lenin’s term) who equally deserve extermination as idolaters (Forsyth, 2004; Charen, 2003).
The bewilderment of current human society is evidenced by the lack of clarity or comprehension of the fundamental issues, which require identification and elucidation as well as validation of their credibility and authenticity. The primary defect now is, as it always has been, that the design of the human mind renders it intrinsically incapable of being able to tell truth from falsehood. This single, most crucial of all inherited defects lies at the root of all human distress and calamity.
Operationally, the mind is dualistic and thus sets up separatist mentations based on arbitrary, hypothetical positionalities that have no intrinsic reality. Thus, by design, the mind has the basic defect, as pointed out by Descartes, that it cannot differentiate
res cogitans
(also
cognitans
) from
res externa
(i.e., mentalizations about the seeming appearance of the world versus the world as it actually is). The mind thus confuses its own projections and mistakenly assumes that they have an external, independent existence, whereas, in reality, no such condition exists.
The design of the human mind is also comparable to that of a computer in which the brain is the hardware that is capable of playing any software programs fed into it. The hardware is, by design, incapable of protecting itself from false information; therefore, the mind will believe any software program with which society has programmed it, for it is innocently without any safeguard or protection. The same declaration has been made by all the greatest spiritual leaders of history who unanimously state that the basic defect of humanity is its relatively invincible ignorance, the recovery from which is operationally impossible without the help of a spiritual teacher.
The human mind, therefore, by virtue of its innate structure, is naïve, blind to its limitations, and innocently gullible. Everyone is the victim of the ignorance and limitation of the human ego. Not only is the majority of the content of the average mind fallacious (e.g., fifty percent of the information on the Worldwide Web tests as ‘false’), but it is also programmed to attack itself with self-hatred, depression, guilt, low self-esteem, envy, greed, conflict, and endless misery. These defects are then projected onto the world as hate, war, violence, and genocide. The ego defends its own limitations with prideful denial, thus becoming its own victim.
That the human mind, without help, is unable to tell truth from falsehood due to its own innate structure and design is so staggering a discovery that it is roughly comparable to the discovery by Copernicus that caused cultural shock in the sixteenth century. Because this single fact alone is confrontational to the average mind, it will probably not be welcomed or warmly greeted by those who profit from sophistry and its illusions.
In today’s world, it is not just the seeker of spiritual truth who is focused as never before on discovering how to tell truth from falsehood. The general public is in a semi-paralysis state due to the quandary of doubt and futility of hoping for any kind of dependable authenticity in the current public discourse. Public interest is riveted on testimony before investigative panels. Mobs in Madrid chant, “We want the truth.” Juries strain to sift through evidence, and protest groups vociferously challenge every aspect of society.
At this time, there is no common agreement on even the most basic, simple, and obvious questions: What to do? What to do when an avowed enemy slaughters thousands of innocent civilians? Should we ‘lock up’ criminals or just see them as victims of society and let them run the streets as compulsive predators? Is it simple, common-sense police work to scrutinize obvious terrorist-group suspects, or is that to be forbidden by civil rights? It is not even clear who is the perpetrator and who is the victim. Who or what is to blame?
Over many centuries, the greatest minds of history have struggled with the problem of defining truth and the inability to decisively validate the credibility of its purported expressions.
The Great Books of the Western World
collectively calibrate at the intellectual range of consciousness level 460.
Science itself (calibration level in the 400s), which has survived relatively intact and unscathed by the assaults on truth, has had its own internal dissentions of which the philosophic implications of the Heisenberg ‘uncertainty principle’ have been the focus in the last few decades. This, in turn, has led to the awareness that no major advance in science can occur without a further understanding of the nature of consciousness itself.
As a result of the progressive evolution and advancement of the level of consciousness of mankind over the centuries, the decisive discovery was made during the late 1970s, and continued to develop on up to the present time, of how to actually tell truth from falsehood for the first time in the history of mankind. Although the fundamental physiological tool upon which it is based seems deceptively simplistic, like the advent of the telescope, it opened up a whole new universe of discovery. Because the test utilized the response of the universal energy fields of consciousness, the truth or falsehood of any statement about anything anywhere in time or space could be instantly discovered. In addition, it was revealed that there were calibratable levels of truth and that each, in turn, identified energy levels that dominated human consciousness.
Each identifiable, calibratable level of consciousness defines a range of options and possibilities as well as limitations. A new era of human knowledge has begun and has already brought about the discovery of an enormous amount of crucial and significant information of great importance to mankind. This has resulted in a recontextualization of the nature of the human experience in its manifold expressions. The implications, as will be seen, are profound.
The modern world is confronted with the complexities of integrating rapidly advancing technology, cultural and social ideological conflict, and the ambiguities of morality, ethics, religion, and spirituality, which have to be integrated with the demands of survival, war, and economic changes. Added to this has been amplification via the all-pervasive media, which are themselves a focus of debate.
The missing element throughout history, as well as in the modern world, is that humanity has had no means of truly and objectively discerning truth from falsehood. Thus, society itself is unsupported by verifiable validity in its multitudinous expressions. It is therefore of considerable interest and potential benefit that a means of discerning not only truth but also relative degrees of truth has developed.
This presentation of a new, clinical ‘Science of Truth’ is therefore dedicated to the progress of humanity and the relief of suffering, which is the consequence of the advance in understanding the nature of consciousness in its pristine, pure expression as well as during ordinary life and its vicissitudes.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the input of the thousands of students, fellow researchers, members of study groups, and readers of the prior published works devoted to consciousness research, spirituality, and Truth. We are also grateful for the many organizations that have sponsored major lecture presentations and to the many audiences that have been most generous with their enthusiasm and support.
Special thanks go to Brock Hereford, J.D., for his assistance with research, which was also contributed to by the editor, Sonia M. Martin, M.A., who patiently went through a dozen revisions of the manuscript. Special thanks also go to Betty Bruckner, Nikko Hansen, Dr. and Mrs. Rudolph Kallenbach, and Gloria Grose for their contributions to the lectures and travel. Appreciation is also expressed for the patient efforts of the office staff in handling numerous requests and communications.
Sincere appreciation and gratitude are due the Peer Review Committee members for their feedback, suggestions, and timely responses: William Bartlett, Rev. Toni Boehm, Rev. Marj Britt, Brett Fontenot, Nikko Hansen, Rev. Dr. Robert H. Henderson, Sarah Humphrey, Ron Maehl, Paul Newton, Tom Whitney, Ralph Yager, Jarred Yaron, and Tom Zender.
It has also been my good fortune to have at my side a wonderful wife, co-worker, and helpmate, Susan, who has been a mainstay of research as well as associate at the many lecture presentations. She did over 7,000 calibrations for just this work alone, plus thousands of others devoted to intensive research projects around the clock, seven days a week, for years. Her own one-on-one teaching has been warmly received by the many hundreds who have experienced her warmth and personal interest.
All gratitude is due to the inspiration of the Presence of Divinity whose effulgence radiates forth to the world as the All Present Eternal Source of All that Exists, the formless out of which form is the actualized Infinite Potentiality of the ongoingness of Creation.
David R. Hawkins, M.D., Ph.D.
March 2005

Introduction
Interest in verifiable truth and its concordant reality is currently intense and constitutes the very core of discussions of current domestic and world events. This has caused a worldwide reassessment of basic ethical, spiritual, and religious values, with their implications for morality as well as survival on every level of current life. All discussions subtly or overtly imply a basic underlying standard of responsibility and accountability. Concomitantly, with the rise in ethical discussion, spiritual information itself is currently accelerating and expanding at an exponential rate due to the catalytic effect of recent advances in the overall level of human consciousness, as well as revelations emanating from research into the nature of consciousness.
Consciousness is the unlimited, omnipresent, universal energy field, carrier wave, and reservoir of all information available in the universe. More importantly, it is the very essence and substrate of the capacity to know or experience. Even more critically, consciousness is the irreducible, primary quality of all existence (calibration level 1,000).
In the 1990s, it was discovered that consciousness itself was not just an ineffable mystery or hypothetical postulate but was indeed an identifiable and concretely definable, calibratable reality that reflected a concordance of multiple levels of increasing truth, power, and influence. It was also discovered that humans were attuned to a specific level of consciousness by virtue of a combination of inherited propensity plus the consequence of choices made by the will over long periods of time.
Consciousness research revealed that these invisible, stratified energy levels dominate populations as well as individuals by the phenomenon of entrainment via ‘attractor fields’ (Hawkins, 1995). The effect of each level of consciousness is identifiable by characteristics such as predominant emotional or psychological attitudes and capacities as well as brain physiology, world view, spiritual beliefs, philosophy, and creative potentialities. Each level also reflects a range of possibilities as well as limitations of choice or decision.
These levels can be demonstrated on a scale (logarithmic) of 1 to 1,000, where the number ‘1’ indicates the lowest level of consciousness of life (bacteria) and ‘1,000’ the highest level attainable by humans (the Great Avatars). The calibrated scale is readily applicable to the overall human experience as is demonstrated by the now relatively well-known Map of Consciousness (Hawkins, 1995, 2000, 2003), which is in use worldwide and spreading rapidly as a quick, easy method of discerning truth from falsehood about anything in a matter of seconds (see Appendix B).
The book,
Power vs. Force
(Hawkins, 1995) gives a complete, in-depth discussion of the various levels of consciousness denoted on the Map, which can be briefly summarized as follows:
All life emanates an invisible energy within the all-encompassing general field of consciousness itself, which is primordial to life. The field is permanent, infinite, and all-inclusive in dimension and exists independently yet is inclusive of time, space, and location. The field records (imprints) all aspects of life in minute detail. This track is a permanent recording that is quickly and easily retrieved by the simple, few-second technique of testing changes in muscle strength in response to a stimulus, such as simply making a statement or envisioning a substance, object, person, or location. That which is ‘true’ is recognized by the field of consciousness and thereby energizes the muscle to resist the challenge of an applied pressure. That which is ‘not true’ is not recognized by the field of consciousness and thereby does not energize the muscle to resist the challenge of applied pressure. Consciousness instantly discerns truth from ‘falsehood’ (i.e., the absence of truth), and even uncannily detects the degree of truth.
On the Map of Consciousness, energies that calibrate over 200 indicate ‘true’ and those below 200 are ‘false’ (i.e., ‘not true’). The scale represents a recapitulation of degrees of evolution, from the most primitive to the most evolved. The lowest are most animal-like and include the negative emotions. The positive emotions start out at calibration level 200 and move on up to reason and intellect in the 400s, and then to love at 500, and unconditional love at 540. The rare, enlightened states start at 600 and over. Each level has definite, identifiable characteristics that are unmistakable and concordant with the totality of human experience universally.
The discovery that the truth can be known instantly about anything and everything, anywhere in time or space, resulted in the emergence and continuing development of numerous research study groups worldwide. Needless to say, the discovery of an instant technique that, in effect, “sees all and knows all” opens the door to endless investigation and exciting inquiry in a world in which frustration and impatience about the availability of verifiable truth is a predominant and overwhelming theme. All investigators find the basic concepts and simple technique exciting and a new adventure that leads to remarkable and often astonishing discoveries as well as the satisfaction of the subjective progression of the questioner’s own level of consciousness. (See Appendix C.)
As will become quickly apparent, even a cursory inspection of the Map of Consciousness quickly recontextualizes the totality of all human experience and provides a common base of reference with extensive implications as well as clarifications.
Map of The Scale of Consciousness
Insert current Powerpoint map from H-R attach. via email
The fields of consciousness denote levels of the evolution of consciousness and represent calibratable power or force in a manner comparable or analogous to the physical world and the electromagnetic spectrum of a progressive range of frequencies. The higher levels of calibrated consciousness showed a rapid increase in frequencies that required the construction of a logarithmic rather than an arithmetic scale to facilitate their mathematical range and denotations.
As in the physical domain, each identifiable level has its own inherent qualities, with both limits and constraints intrinsic to the field. This progression of levels of observation and their concordant appearance is in general agreement with advances in the other fields of scientific discovery. The densest levels were measured and described by Newtonian physics. Scientific discovery then progressed beyond differential calculus to the more advanced understanding of quantum mechanics, subparticle physics, nonlinear dynamics, the currently evolving ‘M-theory’, and other basic energy theories.
The elucidation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle was pivotal in its discovery that consciousness itself has a profound effect on the submicroscopic substratum of the observable, measurable universe. Intention itself became recognized as instrumental to the appearance of events.
Rupert Sheldrake (Sheldrake, 1981) formulated the principle that form occurs first within the field of consciousness, so that ‘morphogenic’ patterns plus intention are essential to activating potentiality into actuality. Current ‘string theory’ postulates that the ultimate substratum of all that exists in the universe consists of a universal energy, so all that can be said to exist arises out of a common substrate. The possibility of the transformation from potentiality to actuality is provided by the infinite power of the primordial substrate of all existence, which alone has the power to transform the unmanifest into the realm of the manifest (cal. level 1,000).
The universe is now defined as an interactive wholeness of myriad energy fields of infinite, potentially differing frequencies merely awaiting the influence of the introduction of intention plus form. Thus, we now have a means by which to describe and understand the easily identifiable principle that Creation and Evolution are actually one and the same process (cal. level 1,000), which will be elucidated later.
While at first glance, all these discoveries may seem to be irrelevant to everyday life, in practice, major advances in the understanding of the essential nature of the universe and the evolution of consciousness profoundly facilitate secular as well as spiritual awareness and the comprehension of physical and spiritual evolution. It is no longer necessary to forsake reason, intelligence, and rationality to grasp the reality of nonlinear, invisible influences that advance one’s own understanding and final realization of the ultimate reality underlying that characteristic of consciousness termed ‘subjectivity’.
Consciousness research is of great pragmatic value not only to the scientist but also to all of society in its myriad expressions, from the arts to business, commerce, politics, international relations, diplomacy, and the prevention of war. Additionally, this new arena of discovery has wide applications in every area of research, including methodology and theory.
To the intellectual, the discoveries are exciting and fascinating, and their philosophic implications are profound. Definitive resolutions to ages-old impasses and enigmas of humankind are now clearly apparent.
Numerous social puzzles and seeming dilemmas are resolved simply as a result of finding the missing pieces by which resolution is the automatic consequence of recontextualization. That process is the very basis for the “aha!” experiences. The data and information that follow are transformative and accelerate the evolution of consciousness and awareness.
Familiarity with the basic concepts to be presented is of benefit in that it results in automatically seeing things differently, with a consequent resolution of conflict and ensuing peace of mind. As will be discovered, the world is not what it appears to be, nor are its residents the ‘who’ that they presume themselves to be.

SECTION I
WHAT IS TRUTH?

CHAPTER 1
Historical Perspective
From earliest times to the present day, mankind has pondered and struggled with the enigma of its origin, purpose, and destiny: Who are we? Where did we come from? Where do we go after death of the body, if anywhere?
Over the millennia, a myriad of plausible postulations have sought to offer a satisfying resolution. There arose a number of myths, systems, and philosophical discussions as well as a plethora of imaginative and creative cosmologies, each of which, however, became the starting point for a whole additional set of questions, doubts, and conflicts.
It was postulated that mankind came from the heavens or that the earth was the primordial mother. Pantheism suggested that animal spirits and nature were the origin of human life that evolved into polytheism and pantheons of god-like, divine figures, each with personalities and limited, but specified, domains.
In various parts of the world, however, truth via spiritual inspiration and information emerged through the fabled sages and then in the form of the great avatars who founded the great religions that brought some resolution in regional sections of the world’s population, but again, neither peace nor certainty arose. In fact, the followers of each leader often fragmented themselves into competitive factions that utilized religious belief systems as the justification and basis for persecution, hatred, and genocide. Paradoxically, in practice, some misinterpretations of the major religions became the blatantly diametrical opposite of the core of their own teachings.
These deviations from the truth of their own teachings created skepticism about the authority and integrity of not only the institution but also of its theology. In addition to the loss of credibility, there was a negative impact on public opinion. Theocracies appeared to be not only dogmatic but also oppressive, and often adherence to their tenets was from fear rather than from respect for an intuitive recognition of truth. In many parts of the world, the reputation of religion progressively deteriorated. At the present time, for example, Western Europe and large parts of North America have shown a progressive secularization that is now accelerated by the negative impact of the current militant Islamics and the scandals of some Christian churches.
Religious and spiritual skepticism was also a by-product of the fall of authoritarianism as a sufficiency upon which to place confidence. In the last few centuries, the emergence of the dominance of science and the scientific paradigm of reality further diminished the credibility of religious dogma, particularly ecclesiastic authority. Religious conflict was progressively replaced by political ideologies that, paradoxically, were as oppressive as the dogmas they were purported to replace.
A new period of inquisition arrived, such as that to which the peoples of Tibet, China, Russia, Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia, North Africa, the Arabic countries, and Cuba have been subjected in recent times. Then, unfortunately for the world, there was a merging of political extremism with religious zealotry, as exemplified by Islamic radicalism that threatens the world with its violence and fanaticism, in contrast to which secularization seems a welcome relief.
Unlike power, which has no opposite, force always precipitates counterforce, whether the opposing forces are political, religious, or both. Truth, however, has no opposite because falsehood is not the opposite of truth but merely its absence, just as darkness is not the opposite of light but merely represents the lack of it.
At approximately the time of the Harmonic Convergence in the late 1980s, the consciousness level of mankind suddenly jumped from the limited level of 190, which had dominated mankind for centuries, to 205, which is above the critical level of truth and integrity at 200. In more advanced cultures of the world, this rise in the consciousness level resulted in replacing gain with integrity as the yardstick of success. Then ensued a period of time in which nonintegrous companies and their CEOs were at the center of scandal, while at the same time, the company that had the highest level of integrity of the giant corporations worldwide became the largest and most successful company in the world.
Of critical importance is that in November 2003, at the time of (but not ‘caused by’) the Harmonic Concordance, the consciousness level of mankind, after being stable for nearly two decades, rose again to the present level of 207.
During the same time period, consciousness research advanced as a consequence of the discovery of a means to differentiate truth from falsehood. It was found that truth was not a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ but that it was expressible over a calibrated, logarithmic scale from 1 to 1,000. Because consciousness is present everywhere and beyond the limitations of time or space, there is a whole new science of consciousness that, because it has no limits, also enables research into spiritual concepts, spiritual teachings, and the verification of spiritual realities as well as every aspect of society. A new definition of truth emerged that is defined not as a consequence of just content, as in Newtonian physics, but as the consequence of content within a specific field. It was discovered that without reference to the field, there was no possible, reliable statement of truth.
Because consciousness research has no limitations as to subject matter, it allows investigation into areas previously thought to be accessible only by advanced science, the mystic, or great spiritual geniuses over time. Thus, by the use of the same investigative method, it was possible to identify and calibrate the levels of truth of spiritual concepts, teachers and teachings, as well as religions and ecclesiastical doctrines. Upon investigation, it was found that the highest levels of truth in history were realized by the great mystics whose energy fields still impact all mankind to this day, whether acknowledged or not.
Even when spiritual reality is denied, such as by the atheist or skeptic, an overall context of ethics and morality still remains that rules all mankind in all ages, even though recognition of its origination is denied. At the present time, intellectual as well as ethical and spiritual endeavor are facilitated by these advances in consciousness overall as well as by the rapid development of information about the quality of consciousness itself.
The most recent advances in scientific theory postulate that there is a common submatrix to all physical existence, consisting of high-frequency fields of energy (this statement calibrates at 1,000). The difficulty with integrating spiritual truth, consciousness research, and advanced theoretical physics is that the mind thinks dualistically. Thus, to observation and description, perceived ‘reality’ seems to be separated into different categories of domains or realms, such as the physical versus the nonphysical or the experiential versus the observable, as demarcated by the following list of comparisons:
Physical vs. nonphysical
Philosophy vs. materiality
Experiential vs. observable
Microscopic vs. macroscopic
Subjective vs. objective
Measurable vs. nonmeasurable
Linear vs. nonlinear
Predictable vs. nonpredictable
Secular vs. spiritual
Matter vs. spirit
Intellectual vs. emotional
Definable vs. ineffable
Scientific vs. nonscientific
Truth vs. falsehood
Spiritual vs. egoistic
Abstract vs. concrete
Known vs. unknown
Limited vs. unlimited
Science vs. religion
Phenomenal vs. actual
From the above, it becomes clear that what was thought to be distinct categories of existence, reality, or experience are primarily just different categories of perception and mentation, i.e., Descartes’
res cogitans.
In reality, as in Reality, there are no separations or distinct realms of independent existence
(res externa)
. Operationally, however, descriptions seem to apply specifically only to seemingly separate realms, and intellectually, there seems to be no common ground to these perceived disparate realms.
The sought-for commonality to all realms of subjective experience and investigation turns out to be the omnipresent energy field traditionally denoted as ‘consciousness’, the very substrate and core of all existence and of intelligence itself. Consciousness alone has all the qualities by which to compare and unite these seemingly disparate realms into a comprehensive unity with stratified expressions. Consciousness itself is the key to the sought-for ‘unified field theory of everything (statement calibrates at 1,000). Beyond the field of consciousness, nothing exists because it is universal and independent of time or location. Curiously, at the same time, it is knowable, able to be experienced, and its levels are discernable and identifiable.
We can start from the beginning and then address the following questions:
1. What is common, necessary, and intrinsic to all possibilities of existence, experience, or expressions thereof?
2. What is the irreducible substrate of the visible and the invisible, the subjective and the objective, form and formless, and identifiable anywhere in time or space, i.e., the Absolute?
3. Is the Presence of such universality identifiable, to what degree, and under what circumstances?
The field of consciousness alone fulfills all the requirements. Its presence can be discovered only via the exercise of its own innate quality, i.e.

... [truncated]