This,  the  dghth  book  in  a  progressive  serle 
b:l.'iCU  un  the:  revdations  of  consciousn 
re' :an.h. resl.l  Leu  from  ;1  group  uf Ie  'nlfl' 
giVl"n  by  the  author at the  rcqu  L of lhe 
original  puhlisher  of  A  Lour.,e 
~1i.~d  'S,  along  with  memb  r  of 
sevcml  self-hdp  groups,  induuin~ 
Akoholic..s  Anon) mous.  ACL\!. 
l  ttituuinal  Healing 
oLher  recovery  group:.. ,LOU  a 
numh 'I'  )f dini  jam. 

.cnter. 

in 

Our  sodet)  Iin:~s 

iLh 

'on..,Unt  .,Ln.;.ss  anxiely. fear.  pain, suffering, d 'pre. .,ion. 
and  worry. A1cohou  m,  Lmg  addicLion, obe..\it)', 
problems. ;U1U  COUleeI'  :ire  constanll}  in  u1e  Ot:\\ 
1  lankind in g "ncraJ  I'lllit had \'cr)' lilLl . iniormation 
about· how  LO  addre  . life's  dmUenges  withe>  It 
resorting to um!:t-".  urge~'.  or  oW1scllJlK 

"ual 

ISBN  978-097150078-5 

52 'II'I 

9  7B0971  5007B5 

VERITA 

¥ 

Healing
 
and
 
Recovery
 

Also by David R. Hawkins 

Reality, Spirituality,  and Modern Man
 

Discovery of the Presence of God: Devotional Nonduality
 

Transcending the Levels of Consciousness:
 
The Stairway to Enlightenment
 

Truth  vs. Falsehood: How to Tell the Difference
 

1· Reality and Subjectivity
 

The Eye of the 1· From Which Nothing Is Hidden
 

Power vs. Force: The Hidden Determinants ofHuman Behavior
 

Dialogues on Consciousness and Spirituality
 

Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis and
 
Calibration of the Levels of Human Consciousness
 

Orthomolecular Psychiatry (with Linus Pauling)
 

Healing
 
and
 
Recovery
 

David R. Hawkins, M.D., Ph.D. 

VERITAS 

13>
 

Copyright ©  2009 by David R. Hawkins 

The material in this book may not be reproduced 
or transmitted in whole or in part in any medium 
(whether  electronic,  mechanical  or  otherwise) 
without the  express written authorization of the 
publisher. To  request  authorization,  please  contact 
Veritas  Publishing  Company,  outlining  the  specific 
material  involved,  the  proposed  medium,  and  if 
applicable, the  number  of copies,  as  well  as  the 
purpose  of the  use. 

This book is  not intended to be considered legal, 
medical,  or  any  other  professional  service. The 
information  provided  is  not  a  substitute  for  pro­
fessional  advice  or  care. If you  require  or desire 
legal,  medical,  or  other  expert  assistance,  you 
should seek the  services of a  competent profes­
sional.  The  author,  the  publisher,  and  their 
employees  and  agents  are  not  liable  for  any 
damages  arising  from  or in  connection  with  the 
use  of or reliance  on  any  information  contained 
in this  book. 

Veritas  Publishing
 
P.O.Box  3516
 
W.  Sedona,AZ 86340 U.S.A.
 
Phone: 928-282-8722  •  Fax: 928-282-4789
 
www.veritaspub.com
 

Hardbound ISBN:978-0-9715007-8-5
 

LCCN:2008941261
 

DEDICATION 

Dedicated to the Highest Good:
 
Physical, Mental,  and Spiritual
 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS
 

Preface 

Foreword 

Introduction 

ix 

xi 

xiii 

Chapter 

1  A Map of Consciousness 

Table: Map of Consciousness 
Table: Consciousness/Societal Problems  30 
Diagram: Brain Function and Physiology  42 

17 
16 

Chapter 
Chapter 
Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 
Chapter 

Chapter 
Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 
Chapter 
Chapter 

Chapter 
Chapter 

2  Assisting Healing 
3  Stress 
4  Health 
5  Spiritual First Aid 
6  Sexuality 
7  The Aging Process 
8  Handling Major Crises 
9  Worry, Fear, and Anxiety 
10  Pain and Suffering 
11  Losing Weight 
12  Depression 
13  Alcoholism 
14  Cancer 
15  Death and Dying 

43 
75 
107 
141 

173 

199 
229 

263 

299 

329 

363 

395 
425 
451 

Appendices 

Appendix A  Map of the Scale of Consciousness 

475 
AppendixB  How to Calibrate Levels of Consciousness  477 

Appendix C  References 

About the Author 

vii 

489 

493 

viii
 

PREFACE
 

These are transcriptions of a series of popular lectures 
originally  presented  in  a  videotape  format  and  now 
edited and updated for  convenience  in written form. 
They originated at the request of the original publisher 
of A  Course  in  Miracles  (The  Foundation  for  Inner 
Peace),  subsequent  to  a  large  joint  meeting  in  the 
1980s  in  Detroit, Michigan,  of members  of several 
self-help  groups, including Alcoholics Anonymous, 
A  Course in Miracles (ACIM),  Attitudinal Healing 
Centers,  and  a  number  of  clinicians  and  recovery 
groups. 

Although  the  lectures  have  been  adapted  for 

written format, they remain close  to the  original  pre­
sentations  and  include  references  to  discoveries  in 
consciousness research as well as clinical and spiritual 
premises. There is purposeful repetition of basic infor­
mation  as  each  lecture  was  complete  within  itself. A 
benefit  of  repetition  is  that  the  material  becomes 
familiar  and  absorbed  without  putting  forth  mental 
effort  or  memorization. It  is  intrinsically  simple,  and 
the  inherent  truths  become  obvious  and  easy  to 
assimilate. The  information  prOVided  is  of a  general 
nature  and  is  not  meant  to  displace  or  replace 
personal  medical  advice  by  one's  own  health 
practitioner. 

ix 

I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 

I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 

I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 
I
 

FOREWORD
 

Information  tends  to  become  compartmentalized, 
especially  in  academic  versus  clinical  science  and 
practice  (Hawkins,  2006,  "Paradigm  Blindness"). 
These areas in turn become separated from spiritual 
principles and realities, which are subsequently also 
isolated from  depth psychology, psychoanalysis, and 
group dynamics. Psychopharmacology research pro­
ceeds  in  its  own  development  independently of all 
the above, as  does advanced theoretical physics and 
the  emergence  of  nonlinear  dynamics  and  chaos 
theory. Each  discipline  developed within the limita­
tions of its own parameters because there had been 
no  context of sufficient dimension to  include  all  of 
them until  the  development  of the  clinical  science 
of consciousness research. This provided a  common 
context of reference and an all-inclusive paradigm of 
reality via the now well-known "Map  of the Scale  of 
Consciousness" (Hawkins, 1995, Power vs.  Force). 

Traditional  sciences  were  limited  to  the  linear 

in 

dimensions  and  primarily  to  the  Newtonian  con­
the 
cepts  of  cause  and  effect,  included 
consciousness  level  of  the  400s  (see  Map,  pg.  16, 
Chapter 1), whereas experiential reality is  nonlinear 
and  subjective  (and  proceeds  from  level  500  and 
up). Phenomena  are  the  consequence  of the  emer­
gence of potentiality as actuality, a process whereby 
content is subject to overall context. Thus, healing is 
the  result  of not  just  clinical  processes  but  also  of 
overall  biological  potentialities  that  often  do  not 
materialize  without  the  unseen  power  of  spiritual 
alignment.  Chemistry  is  within  the  predictable 

xi 

Newtonian  discipline  of  scientific  (linear  content) 
expectation, but health recovery is greatly facilitated 
by the unseen power of the spiritual dimensions of 
intentionality of consciousness itself (nonlinear con­
text). 

The clinical power and influential impact of spir­
itual  context  is  overwhelmingly  displayed  by  the 
millions  of  recoveries  from  medically  hopeless  ill­
nesses  as  exhibited  by  worldwide  membership  in 
faith-based  organizations  of  which  Alcoholics 
Anonymous  and A  Course  in  Miracles  (ACIM)  are 
prime  examples. Since  the  basic principles  of faith­
based  recoveries  are  outside  the  paradigm  of  the 
reality  of  academic  science,  their  importance  was 
not studied or comprehended because academic sci­
ence  was  concerned  with  just  content  and  not 
context.  The  emergence  of 
the  Heisenberg 
Uncertainty Principle finally accorded respectability 
for  the  recognition  of the  reality  and  influence  of 
the effect of consciousness itself. Thus, the power of 
intention  came  to  be  recognized  as  an  important 
critical  factor  in  catalyzing  potentiality  into  actu­
ality.  (See  Stapp's MindfUl  Universe  for  correlation 
of quantum theory, consciousness, and intention. 

:xii 

INTRODUCTION
 

The  lectures  on  healing  and  recovery  represent  the 
integration and concordance of experience and infor­
mation from  multiple fields, including  more  than fifty 
years  of  clinical  practice  that  encompasses  diverse 
fields  of healing, such  as  holistic  health, psychiatry, 
psychology,  psychoanalysis,  psychopharmacology, 
medicine, and the application of spiritual principles as 
well  as  concepts  and  discoveries  from  the  emerging 
clinical science of consciousness research, 

The  development  of consciousness  research  was 

reported  in  multiple  lecture  series  (Hawkins,  2002­
2008) as  well as  in a series of books: Qualitative and 
Quantitative Analysis and Calibration  of the Levels 
of Human  Consciousness  (Bell  and  Howell,  1995; 
Veritas  Publishing,  1995);  Power  vs.  Force  (Veritas, 
1995;  Hay  House,  2002);  The  Eye  of the  I  (Veritas, 
2001);l'Reality and Subjectivity (Veritas, 2003); Truth 
vs.  Falsehood  (Axial  Publishing,  2005);  Transcending 
the Levels of Consciousness (Veritas,  2007); Discovery 
of  the  Presence  of  God:  Devotional  Nonduality 
(Veritas,  2007); and Reality,  Spirituality,  and Modern 
Man  (Axial, 2008). A collection of lecture slides and a 
comprehensive Index of Calibrations are also in prepa­
ration. 

All  the  above  give  detailed descriptions  as  well  as 
explanations of theory, along with the application of a 
simple, calibrated scale of levels  of consciousness and 
Truth as  exemplified by the Map of Consciousness on 
page  16. The fields  of suffering calibrate  below level 
200, and the progressive levels of truth are above 200. 
Science  is  in the  400s; spiritual  realities  begin  at  500 

xiii 

(Love)  and  progress  upward  to  540  (Unconditional 
Love), to 570 (saintly), and then to the levels of joy, the 
stages of illumination, and, [mally, Enlightenment. 

The fields  below level 200 potentiate illness; those 
above 200 support healing, including medical science, 
which calibrates in the 400s.The spiritual power of the 
consciousness  levels  of  the  500s  facilitates  further 
recoveries that are not otherwise possible. 

All  illnesses are physical, mental, and spiritual, and 
the highest levels  of recovery are  the consequence of 
Simultaneously  addressing  all  three  levels  and  seeing 
them as being of equal importance. Spiritual intention 
and contextualization increase the percentage of posi­
tive  responses to  strictly medical treatment. Innate  to 
the human condition, however, are inherent limitations 
consequent to evolutionary design, some of which can 
be  transcended  and  some  of  which  cannot  be. 
Therefore, hope and faith  need to be accompanied by 
surrender to  and  acceptance  of a  Higher Will. As  our 
research has validated, life  cannot be destroyed; it can 
only  change  expression  from  the  limited  physical 
linear  reality  to  the  unlimited  nonlinear  spiritual 
reality. 

xiv 

MAP  OF  THE  SCALE  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

God-view  Self-view 

Level 

Log 

Emotion 

Process 

self 

Is 

Enlightenment  700-1,000 

Ineffllble 

All·being 

Perfect 

Peace 

One 

Complete 

Loving 

Benign 

Joy 

Love 

Wise 

Meaningful 

Reason 

Merciful 

Harmonious 

Acceptance 

Inspiring 

Hopeful 

Willingness 

Enabling 

Satisfactory 

Neutrality 

Pennitting 

Feasible 

Courage 

600 

540 

500 

400 

350 

310 

250 

200 
~ 

Pure 
Consciousness 

illumination 

Bliss 

Serenity 

Transfiguration 

Reverence 

Revelation 

Understanding  Abstraction 

Forgiveness 

Transcendence 

Optimism 

Intention 

Trust 

Release 

Affirmation 

Empowerment 

LEVELS  OF  TRUTH 

LEVELS  OF  FALSEHOOD 

T 

Indifferent  Demanding 

Pride 

Vengeful 

Antagonistic 

Anger 

Denying 

Disappointing 

Desire 

Punitive 

Frightening 

Uncaring 

Tragic 

Fear 

Grief 

Condemning  Hopeless 

Apathy,  hatred 

Vindictive 

Evil 

Despising 

Hateful 

Guilt 

Shame 

175 

150 

125 

100 

75 

50 

30 

20 

16 

SCorn 

Hate 

Craving 

Anxiety 

Regret 

Inflation 

Aggression 

Enslavement 

Withdrawal 

Despondency 

Despair 

Abdication 

Blame 

Destruction 

Humiliation 

Elimination 

CHAPTER  1 

A Map of Consciousness 

We  will  present the  concept of utilizing  a  conscious­
ness approach to a variety of man's problems, such as 
stress, alcoholism, various diseases, depression, fear, and 
major  loss,  to  name  a  few.  In  discussing  these  chal­
lenges, reference will be repeatedly made to the Map of 
Consciousness. It  is  referred  to  frequently  to  explain 
the relationship between body, mind, and spirit, which 
is so important to comprehend in relation to self-healing. 
the  value  of  the  Map  of 
Consciousness itself without reference to a  particular 
problem, we will describe  its  implications  and useful­
ness  in its  application to  all  human  problems. It is  an 
exponential model (to the base 10) that evolved out of 
a  composite  of  decades  of  research  in  a  variety  of 
fields.  It  documents  the  ftrst  time  that  these  energy 
fields have ever been calibrated. 

To  understand 

When  referring  to  consciousness, we  are  describ­
ing those energy fields. Shown on the Map are general 
fields  of consciousness that have been calibrated as  to 
the power of the field and its direction, as indicated by 
the arrows. Those below the level of Courage at 200 go 
downward, and those above Courage go upward.There 
is  significance  in  the  direction  of the  energy  fields. 
Those  that are  in a  negative  direction do  not support 
life  and could be called 'anti-life'. Those that are in the 
positive direction ofTruth support and nurture life.At 
the  top  of the  Map, we  approach  an  alignment with 
Truth  and  see  that  the  energy  fields  become  more 
powerful as their numerical calibrations increase. 

The calibration of the fields starts at zero, and what 

17 

18 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the world calls  Enlightenment  calibrates  from  600  to 
1,000. Enlightenment means that one has transcended 
duality and identification with the small, personal self. 
Within the Map, these levels are what a  person gener­
ally means when they talk about 'me' or 'myself'. They 
represent the ego, wWch is  the self with a  small's', in 
contrast to Self with a capital '5' at the top of the Map. 
To the right of the list of energy fields are the emo­
tions associated with each specific level. Farther to the 
right is  the process that is  going on in consciousness. 
The left side of the Map  shows the view that one has 
of God and of life at each level of consciousness. 

The average person (if they calibrate over 200) can 
verify  these  numbers  by  using  the  simple  system  of 
muscle  testing  (fully  described  in  Appendix  B). 
Someone can test you by pressing down on your arm 
while they say,"Fear is over 50? Over 60? Over 70? Over 
80?  Over 90?  Over 100?"At 100, the arm will go weak. 
These  calibrations  have  been  verified  worldwide  by 
many  people  for  decades  and  are  pragmatically  very 
useful clinically as well as  for research. Starting at the 
bottom of the Map  are the energy fields  called Shame 
at  20  and  Guilt  at  30. The  emotion  that  accompanies 
these levels is  self-hatred, and the process going on in 
consciousness  is  one  of self-destruction. The  view  of 
the world associated with tWs energy field is that of sin 
and  suffering. Therefore,  the  God  of  such  a  world 
would have to be the potential, ultimate destroyer who 
is even  angry  with  mankind  and  would  throw  their 
eternal souls into hell forever. With such a perception 
of God, one does not really need a devil, so there is no 
devil listed under 'God-view' because that is  really the 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

19 

demonic depiction of God.  For  many  people  on  the 
planet,  death  comes  as  a  matter  of  passive  suicide 
because  of unconscious  guilt  and  self-hatred. {This  is 
mentioned  later,  especially  in  relation  to  addictions.) 
Suicide can take the forms of not caring for oneself, not 
getting out of the way of the bus, rolling the car over, 
an  accidental  drug  overdose, high-risk  behaviors,  and 
more. 

Apathy calibrates at 50 and also has a negative energy 
field. The emotions ofApathy are hopelessness, despair, 
despondency; and depression, which are  the result  of 
the loss of energy.Apathy leads to viewing the world as 
hopeless,  and  the  God  of  a  hopeless  condition  of 
mankind  would  be  dead  or  nonexistent. There  are 
many skeptics, atheists, and philosophers who uncon­
sciously  justify  any  particular  position  that  negates 
Reality and try to rationalize  it, defend it, and make it 
sound sensible (see Truth vs. Falsehood).The ideas that 
God is dead and that man and the condition of life  are 
hopeless invalidate  the value  of life  and are  therefore 
destructive. 

Apathy is like an old lady rocking back and forth in 
her rocking  chair, staring  hopelessly  out  the  window 
after receiving an erroneous telegram that her son was 
killed in the war.A large portion of the world lives in a 
state of apathy, including whole countries and subcon­
tinents, where the people stare  blankly because there 
is no hope and no chance.About one-third of the world 
lives  at  the  bottom  three  states  of  Fear,  Grief,  and 
Apathy.The woman rocking back and forth has also had 
adverse changes occur in her brain.We could add a col­
umn to the Map that says 'Brain Chemistry' because this 

20 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

energy field  of Apathy results in a  shift of neurotrans­
mitters,  creating  a  clinical  state  called 'hopelessness'. 
(See Brain Function and Physiology diagram at the end 
of this chapter.) 

If the woman in the rocking chair were to start cry­
ing  and  expressing  emotion,  then  she  would  be 
improving  and  moving  up  to  an  energy  field  called 
Grief, which is characterized emotionally by regret and 
feelings of loss and despondence.The process going on 
in consciousness  is  dispirited. Grief is  the  loss  of the 
energy of life, spirit, and the will to live. When the will 
to live is lost, then the energy from the universe is lost, 
leading to depression. People in Grief see a  sad world 
and a God who ignores them. 

Fear is the next energy field, which is also negative, 
but  it  calibrates  at  100  and  therefore  contains  a  lot 
more  energy.  One  can run a  great  distance  with fear. 
Fear  runs  a  great  part  of the  world  and  plays  a  very 
important part in everyone's life.The advertising indus­
try plays off our fears  to sell us products. Grief has to 
do with the past, but fear, as we ordinarily experience 
it, is  of the future. Fear is  emotionally experienced in 
everyday life  by the average  person as worry, anxiety, 
or panic.The process going on in consciousness is that 
of deflation. For example, the animal shrinks when it is 
frightened. 

Remember in grade school when the teacher called 
on  somebody  for  an  answer,  everyone  would  shrink 
and hide behind the person in front of them? Fear is a 
shrinkingness and a fear of the future, yet it has a lot of 
energy. If we know what to be afraid of, the energy of 
fear can really be beneficial as caution. 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

21 

The lower states on the Map actually represent the 
failure to face the energy field above them.The way out 
of depression is  to  look at the  fear  that is underlying 
the  depression  and  notice  how  it  usually  takes  the 
form  of "I  have  lost  the  source  of my  happiness." All 
these  levels  below  Courage· have  a  negative  energy 
field  stemming  from  the  same  thought-that happi­
ness comes from outside oneself. Putting one's survival 
on something outside oneself therefore results in states 
of powerlessness, victimhood, and weakness by virtue 
of having projected the source of one's power outside 
of oneself. 

Underlying depression is  the fear that one has lost 
something, because grief has to do with loss. Getting a 
person  to  face  that  fear  and  handle  it  rapidly  over­
comes the depression. Later, we will look at how con­
sciousness  views  fear  and  will  present  the  specific 
technique of how to let go of resisting the energy field 
of fear  by letting  it run out so that depression sUbse­
quently disappears. 

The  energy  field  above  fear  is  Desire, which  cali­
brates  at  125. It  is  still  a  negative  energy field,  which 
one experiences in ordinary life as 'wanting' .There are 
the  general  feelings  of wantingness  and  cravingness, 
which  are  part  of  the  field  of  addictions  and  can 
become  obsessions  and  compulsions.  The  process 
going on in consciousness is entrapment. One is run by 
what one desires, and the source of happiness is  seen 
as  external. Advertising takes advantage of this  by cre­
ating  a  desire  via  an  unconscious  connection; it  is  a 
symbolization with something archetypal in the uncon­
scious mind that creates a desire. 

22 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Desire can run an entire lifetime. It can be the moti­
vation to become successful or famous, to have a lot of 
money, to  be  a  celebrity, or to  acquire  whatever one 
thinks is  going to bring happiness, including a  special 
relationship. Wantingness  and  cravingness  are  often 
insatiable  as  they  originate  from  an  energy field  that 
can never really be satisfied. It is  an ongoing, contin­
uous  energy  field  that  keeps  creating  more  desire. 
However,  the  energy  field  can  be  used  positively  as 
motivation and intention towards fulftllment of poten­
tial and inner goals. Failure to internalize goals leads to 
frustration and resentment. 

Anger, which calibrates at 150, is accompanied by a 
large amount of energy. If the angry person knows how 
to utilize  that anger constructively instead of destruc­
tively,  the  energy of anger can then  lead  to  progress. 
11Irough television, people in the third-world countries 
began to  see  what other people  had, which fired  up 
their desire, led to frustration and anger, and culmin­
ated  in  that  energy  being  utilized  to  create  entire 
social movements, changes in the legislature, and con­
structive  changes  in  SOciety. Thus,  anger  can  be  uti­
lized to energize resolve and determination. 

The anger we witness or experience in daily life is 
usually  in  the  form  of resentment. At  a  more  severe 
level,  it  may  lead  to  hatred,  grievances,  grudges,  and 
eventually even to murder or war.The process going on 
in  consciousness  is  one  of  expansion;  for  example, 
when an animal is angry, it swells up.When the cat gets 
angry, its tail swells up to almost twice its normal size, 
and the cat tries to look imposing. The biological pur­
pose  of  expansion  is  to  intimidate  one's  apparent 

A  MAP  a F  CON SCI a USN E S S 

23 

enemy.The energy of anger can be utilized positively to 
pursue something better for oneself and thus move up 
to Pride. 

Pride  calibrates  at  175,  which  denotes  far  more 
energy than the levels below it. However, Pride still has 
a  negative  direction. We  have  heard that "pride  goeth 
before a faIt' There are many famous examples in history 
indicating that pride is a very vulnerable position (e.g., 
hubris). Pride  can be useful  in that it has  much more 
energy  than  the  lower  levels  of  consciousness.  It 
expresses itself in daily life as arrogance, contempt, and 
sarcasm. The  downside  of it  is  really  denial,  and  the 
problem is that the process in consciousness is  one of 
inflation. 

We  say that a person in Pride has a swelled head, is 
too big for his britches, is  unteachable, cannot hear, or 
has a closed mind. This level of consciousness leads to 
a  polarized  position  of opinion  that  puts  the  person 
constantly  on  the  defensive  for  being  'right',  so  the 
world must be wrong. The energy is dissipated in end­
less defensiveness. 

A  reason  for  pride  relates  to  an  underlying  fear. 
Once the person faces the fear, they can let go of pride. 
These  negative  fields  tend  to  reinforce  each  other; 
seldom do they occur alone. One predominates, but all 
are really feeding into each other so that one has grief 
over one's anger; one has  anger over one's pride; one 
has fear over one's grief, and so on.They all tend to rein­
force each other, so an emotional upset is usually com­
posed  of a  combination  of all  these  negative  energy 
fields.  The  techniques  and  realizations  necessary  to 
overcome  the  negative  energy fields  are  described in 

24 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

detail in Transcending the Levels of Consciousness. 

By  being willing to surrender the ego's narcissistic 
emotional  payoffs  of the  negative  energy  fields,  one 
then progresses to the first  level  of true power, called 
Courage,  at  calibration  level  200.  Something  crucial 
now happens at thiS  level because it has an enormous 
amount of power. It is obvious that Courage settled the 
United States ofAmerica. Courage created all the great 
industries  and  was  the  basis  for  man's  getting  to  the 
moon. The Marines start at the level of Pride but really 
move up to the more stable level of Courage.Why? It is 
not so much in the increment of the twenty-five-point 
increase, although that is  sizeable.The critical element 
is that the energy field is now positive because the per­
son  values  truth  rather  than  falsehood,  and  integrity 
instead of temporary gain. 

Above  level  200,  one  is  no  longer  the  victim 
because the energy field is now positive. One might say 
that this field is  like an antenna, and below the level of 
Courage,  the  antenna  is  tuned  to  the  negative,  thus 
pulling adversity into the energy field. 

At level 200, energy goes positive, so the field stops 
pulling negativity from the universe to itself. A person 
is  now in a  different condition as  well. One is  able  to 
face,  cope  with,  and  handle  things,  and, for  the  first 
time, able to be appropriate. 

At the level of Courage, people still experience the 
lesser negative feelings, but they now have the power 
to handle those energies.The critical process is one of 
empowerment. A  person  becomes  re-empowered  by 
telling the truth. This is  obviously critical in the recov­
ery from all illnesses. It is very visibly so in the millions 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

25 

of recoveries  of  members  of Alcoholics Anonymous, 
where Step  1 and all the basic steps are admissions of 
the truth. 

When people admit they are powerless over some­
thing, instead of going weak with the muscle test, they 
suddenly go strong.When they get rid of the arrogance 
of pride, they  may  still  have  other  negative  feelings. 
Persons at the level of Courage who plan to ask  their 
boss for a raise may still have knots in their stomach, be 
angry, and even feel  hopeless about getting one. They 
might  even  be  arrogant,  but  now,  at  the  level  of 
Courage, they  have  enough  power to  handle  all  that 
and be appropriate. They are then able to face  it, cope 
with it, and function in an effective way in the world. 
The next major level is that of Neutral at 250, where 
the energy field is positive and even more aligned with 
.Truth.The emotion of Neutral is self-trust. For example, 
it is 'okay' if one gets the job and 'okay' if one does not. 
The process going on in consciousness is detachment. 
One  is  not attached to  any particular outcome and is 
no  longer  a  victim. The  person  now  has  a  great  deal 
more power and is not dominated by aversions or crav­
ings. The upside of this can be the okayness of life; the 
downside  of 'unattached'  can· be  detached  or flat. At 
Neutral,  one  is  no  longer  suffering  painful  emotions 
and now feels free. One is therefore in a far more pow­
erful state.The way that person sees the world as okay 
considers  God  as  granting  freedom. The  advantage  of 
the level  of Neutral is  that one  has  let go  of resisting 
things  and  therefore  has  a  lot  more  power, but then 
one has to introduce a new energy to move up to the 
next level ofWillingness. 

26 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Willingness, at 310, is  far more powerful. The emo­
tion of it is  accompanied by the thoughts of 'yes', say­
ing yes to life, to join, to agree, to commit, and to align 
with  because  there  is  now the  introduction of inten­
tion. A  person  at  the  level  of Neutral,  when  asked  if 
they would like  to  go  to  a  movie  tonight, would  say, 
"Well, it's okay if we go, and it's okay if we don't."The 
response  lacks  enthusiasm  and  aliveness  and is  still  a 
long way from  abundance, but it is  certainly far more 
comfortable than being attached and in fear, grief, apa­
thy,  or  anger.  The  one  who  becomes  willing  brings 
aliveness  and  intention to  say  yes,  to  commit, and to 
agree. Real power begins with Willingness because one 
has let go of resistance. 

The  next field  above  that  is  called Acceptance, at 
350. It is  a  very  powerful  energy field,  one  of being 
capable,  adequate,  and  confident. There  is  the  begin­
ning of transformation in consciousness. Transformation 
has to do with the person's re-owning that they are the 
source  of their own happiness, and that the power is 
within them.A person on this level is  the one whom a 
big corporation depends on because they are realistic 
and can admit their upside and downside.They are not 
dominated by pride, which means denial, so  they can 
allow for their weaknesses and shortcomings.An exec­
utive  on this  level can say, "You know, I  don't do very 
well  with that guy in Argentina. It would be  better if 
you send Jake; I'm sure he would get along better." The 
executive can indicate where he is limited, accept how 
the world works, avoid  getting into 'right and wrong' 
about  it,  and  therefore  deal  with  it  effectively.  The 
transformation  comes from  re-owning  one's  power. 

A  MAP  0  F  CON SCI 0  USN E S S 

27 

A  person  on  this  level  knows  that· no  matter where 
they are, they will create a circumstance that will bring 
happiness. Rick Warren's The Purpose Driven Life rep­
resents  this  level,  as  do  benevolent  public-service 
organizations. 

The  utilization  of opportunities  occurring  at  this 
level  can  turn  lemons  into  lemonade,  which  comes 
from  a position or way of being and the re-owning of 
one's  own power. To  do  so  leads  to  a  general way of 
being easygoing, and the people at this level do not ruffle 
easily.  Constant  re-owning  of  one's  power  and  recy­
cling  the energy back into the universe  (e.g., through 
selfless service) moves a person up to the energy field 
of Reason at 400. 

Reason, logic, and the intellect are the prime evolu­
tionary characteristics of the human species. They are 
the product of intelligence that is capable of symbolic 
thinking  and abstraction. This  level is  also ,representa­
tive  of disciplined structure that is  in accord with the 
observable  world  and  its  processes. Thus,  emotions, 
including  desires  and  aversions,  are  subordinated  as 
less relevant in comparison to impersonal facts. 

The use of reason transcends the limitations of nar­
cissistic/emotional  distortion  that  is  characteristic  of 
childishness  and  the  personal  emotionality  of perva­
sive  likes, dislikes, and endless wants. The silencing of 
the clamor of emotionality allows for cool calculation 
and dominance of processing by facts and confirmable 
data. Thus emerges the capacity for assimilation, recog­
nition, classification, and comprehension of the signifi­
cance and meaning of vast amounts of information by 
virtue of abstract symbols and their interrelationships. 

28 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Intellect  and  reason  are  necessary  to  interpret 
meaning, value, and significance, which are  subserved 
by  the  term  'philosophy'  and  its  offshoots  of  meta­
physics, epistemology, ontology, theology, and science. 
The history of the evolution of the intellect is imparted 
by The  Great Books of the Western World from which 
we  see  that the  evolution  of the  intellect reached  its 
zenith during the classical period of ancient Greece. It 
resurged again much later as the appearance and dom­
inance  of  an  historical  Reformation  out  of  which 
emerged modern science. Philosophical dereliction  is 
termed 'rhetoric', which reflects nonintegrous manipu­
lation of reason as demonstrated by the decline of the 
level of philosophy in academia of recent decades and 
the  emergence  of the theories of relativism (cal.  190) 
and  their consequent social  discord  (see  Chapter  12, 
Truth vs. Falsehood). 

At  its  purest  level,  reason  and  the  intellect  repre­
sent increased reality testing and nonemotional respect 
for  truth  and  the  means  of its  discernment. This  can 
evolve even more as the love ofTruth for its own sake. 
This eventually leads to a paradigm jump at conscious­
ness  level  500  (Love). Whereas  reason  is  linear  and 
objective, Love  is  a  different dimension as it is  nonlin­
ear and subjective. Thus, it is  said that reason is of the 
mind  (the  brain), whereas  Love  is  of the  being  (the 
heart). 

At its emergence, love  is selective and conditional, 
but  as  it  evolves,  it  progressively  becomes  a  lifestyle 
and  a  way  of relating  to  all  life.  Love  emanates  from 
within the Self and is an expression of happiness. Love 
nurtures and supports life  and is  the beginning of a 

A  MAP  0  F  CON SCI 0  USN E S S 

29 

revelation. Brain  neurotransmitters  change, beginning 
with  the  release  of eildorphins, which  opens  up  mil­
lions  of banks  of neurons  that  up  to  this  time  have 
been  waiting  for  this  energy  field  to  activate  them. 
Scientists are  currently researching the whole field  of 
endorphins (e.g., oxytocin is  associated with concern 
for others and socialization). 

Unconditional  Love  at  calibration level  540  is  the 
energy field of healing and also that of the twelve-step 
groups. There  is  a  rise  in  the  intensity  of the  energy 
field  of aliveness, so  it is  preferable  to be around that 
kind of people because they make us feel more alive by 
giving out energy to the field itself. 

At the bottom levels of consciousness are situations 

of lose-lose. People lose, and those who become associ­
ated with them 10se.This point of view is one oflosing, 
so the person says,"Everywhere I look, there is a closed 
door. If I go this way, I'll lose." They see life  as  a losing 
proposition.The people in the middle calibration range 
look  at  life  as  win-lose.  Their  pridefulness  and  the 
polarization of angriness cause them to see the world 
as one of competition, conflict, and win-lose. "If I win, 
then you 10se."They have endless unconscious fears of 
retaliation because they look at success as vanqUishing 
and  expect  retaliation. "If we  beat  somebody  in  this 
game, we  cannot  really  win  because, after  all,  he  has 
friends that may come looking for us some day, so we 
can never relax:' 

The people at 500 conceptualize and hold life  as a 

win-win  situation. When they win, everybody wins­
the family, the company-so the more money the com~ 
pany makes, the better for the  employees. Companies 

30 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

seek people in the 500s; they do not have to look for 
jobs,  invitations,  or  relationships  because  employers 
want to hire them. They call and say,"Wouldn't you like 
to work for us? Wouldn't you like to be vice president 
of marketing for our company?" Employers and others 
seek out those persons at the higher levels. 

Correlation of Levels of Consciousness 
and Societal Problems 
Rate of 

Level of 

Consciousness  Unemployment 

Rate of  Happiness Rate  Rate of 
Poverty 

"Life is OK"  Criminality 

600+ 
500-600 
400-500 
300-400 
200-300 
100-200 
50-100 
<50 

0% 
0% 
2% 
7% 
8% 
50% 
75% 
97% 

0.0% 
0.0% 
0.5% 
1.0% 
1.5% 
22.0% 
40.0% 
65.0% 

100% 
98% 
70% 
50% 
40% 
15% 
2% 
0% 

0.0% 
0.5% 
2.0% 
5.0% 
9.0% 
50.0% 
91.0% 
98.0% 

As  we  move  up towards  540, inner joy, quiet, and 
inner  knowingness  begin  to  take  place. Within  this 
energy field, we connect with something that is  rock­
like and ever present.This is the beginning of the trans­
figuration  of consciousness, the beginning of an inner 
serenity, and the opening of compassion. At 560, there 
is  Ecstasy-an exquisite, inner knowingness and trans­
figuration of consciousness that lead to states of illumi­
nation (sainthood is at level 570) as it gets closer to the 
600s. 

The energy field  of Compassion is  one that can be 
elected.We  can make a commitment to lovingness as  a 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

31 

way of being, so this requires no belief in God or any 
theological spiritual system. It is a commitment to lov­
ingness that nurtures and supports life in all its expres­
sions. It sees Divinity in all things as it moves up to an 
even higher level where it begins to see the perfection 
of all life. 

Compassion is  a way of knowing and looking into 
the hearts of others. Due to the release of endorphins 
at  this  level  of  revelation  and  transfiguration,  there 
comes an awareness that the separation between one­
self as  an individual  and  another self as  an individual 
starts to break down. It is  almost like the beginning of 
a oneness of the heart, a knowingness-not a thinking­
ness, but a way of being. 

The level of revelation in the high 500s then opens 
the way to transfiguration and compassion that lead to 
ecstasy and the states close to 600. These are  states of 
bliss  and  the  beginning  of states  of illumination  and 
enlightenment.They are often accompanied by feelings 
of Light. For example, the room lit up whe~ Bill Wilson 
of AA  had his  spiritual  experience. He  said  the  room 
was lit by the Infinite Presence (cal. 575).That was the 
beginning of the approach to the energy field  of 600. 
The Radiance suffused out into the world as the world­
wide,  great  Twelve-Step  movement  through  which 
Alcoholics Anonymous has brought about the recovery 
of millions of people. 

The energy field  called Bliss, at 600, is  very impor­
tant  in  relation  to  addictions  because  the  field  trans­
forms a person's life.The person who falls into samadhi 
(deep meditation) by accident goes into a transcenden­
tal  state  when they reach  600  or higher. Usually  that 

32 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

person's  life  is  changed  thereafter.  People  who  have 
near-death  occurrences  experience  those  fields  over 
600, including their own higher Self.Those levels go on 
up  to  Infmity  and  are  the  realm  of  various  world­
famous  spiritual teachers. 

The  energy  field  of  Krishna,  the  Christ,  and  the 
Buddha  is  1,000,  and  the  field  progresses  on  up  to 
Infmity.  The  people  at  those  levels  have  such  enor­
mous  power  that  that  we  call  them  avatars.  As  an 
Avatar,  in  the  three years  of his  ministry, Jesus  Christ 
totally  transformed  the  consciousness  of all  mankind 
for  thousands  of years  to  come. He  transformed lives 
on the horizontal as well as the vertical planes, which 
are fields of enormous power. 

The lower energy fields are like clouds covering the 
sun. As we remove the clouds, we experience the sun, 
which  is  always  shining.  In  the  chapter  about  addic­
tions, we make  a  very precise point that it is  not the 
removal  of the  clouds  that  causes  the  sun  to  shine, 
which  is  what  the  addicted  person  begins  to  think. 
People who get addicted to anything think thatA causes 
B causes C. The removal of this left-brain type of think­
ing and linear causality is the whole purpose of spiritu­
al work, which is the removal of the clouds so that one 
experiences the shining forth of the Self. 

Energy fields  are  so  powerful  that  they  dominate 
our perception.They are really portals out of which we 
see  the world. We  often  hear that  this  is  really  just a 
world of mirrors, and that all we experience is our own 
energy field reflected back upon us as perception and 
experiencing. We  will look at perception, the view of 
the world, and the view of life as it comes out of these 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

33 

various energy fields. 

As  we  said  in  the  beginning,  guilt  (cal.  30)-that 
field  of  self-hatred  and  destructive  energy-sees  a 
world of sin and suffering.Therefore, that person walk­
ing down the street looks around and sees only suffer­
ing. When they open the newspaper, they also see the 
endless suffering of mankind. 

The people who are in the energy field of hopeless­
ness and despair (cal. 50) literally see a hopeless world. 
When they open the newspaper, they notice the hope­
less  condition of mankind, the  endless  wars, poverty, 
and crime. They actually experience perceptually, visu­
ally,  auditorily-through  all  the  senses-a  world  of 
hopelessness. The God of a hopeless world is dead. 

The persons in a dispirited state of grief, regret, loss, 
and  despondency  come  from  the  loss  of the  will  to 
live. They walk  down the  street and  see  a  sad world. 
This  is  actually  experienced. We  know that when we 
are in a sad state and walk down the street, we see the 
children and old people and think;' How sad."We look 
.at  the  buildings,  see  mankind's  condition  when  we 
open  the  newspaper,  and  think  how  sad  life  is.  Our 
own energy field is  coloring everything else. It is  as if 
we put on colored glasses and then experience every­
thing as  being colored by this energy field. 

People dominated by fear perceive this as  a world 
of danger,  a  threatening,  frightening  world  that  is  in 
constant  jeopardy. When  walking  down  the  street  in 
that energy field, they see danger all around them.They 
see threats and muggers everywhere; they think there 
is  a  rapist  under  the  bed;  and  when  they  open  the 
newspaper, they see  the frightening  conditions of life 

34 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

with  its  jeopardy  and  danger. They  live  inside  their 
house, lock their car in their own garage, and then lock 
the  garage  that  is  attached  to  the  house,  which  is 
locked and inside  a  fence, which is  also  locked. (Fear 
can be transformed into a more positive expression as 
caution.) 

Having  more  police  really  does  not  help  because 
where will the police be when one's house is  robbed? 
Of course, they  are  going  to  be  at  the  other  end  of 
town, so that does not help.Trying to change the world 
does  not  assuage  the  fear  energy  because  it  is  really 
coming from within one's own energy field. 

The  field  above  Fear  is  that  of Desiringness  (cal. 
125), which represents  a  frustrating  world  of endless 
wantingness. The  people  dominated  by  this  field  are 
said to have a 'solar plexus' fixation, so they walk down 
the street seeing all the things they want. They see the 
car they want; the  beauty they want; the  status, posi­
tions,  and  buildings  they  want. They  are  frustrated 
because  their  endless  desires  and  cravings  and  more 
and  more  millions  of dollars  do  not bring happiness. 
The  fact  of having  fifty million  dollars  does  not help 
because the desiring and wanting for more power are 
insatiable. 

The  person in these  energy fields  cannot be satis­
fied  and becomes frustrated and angry. The angry per­
son then sees a competitive world, a world of conflict 
and war, of 'me against you'. This  person looks  out in 
the woods and thinks the tall trees are competing with 
the  small  trees  for  sunlight. This  is  the  matrix  of the 
political/social view of cultural perpetrator/victim.This 
concept is projected onto a field where no such thing 

A  MAP  0  F  CON SCI 0  USN E S S 

35 

as  competition is  even happening. This  person lives 
in a world of endless possibility of war and conflict and 
sees everything as competition, not as cooperation. 

People who are ftxated at the level of Pride would 
see this as a world of social ranking, so when walking 
down  the  street, they would notice  the  Gucci  shoes, 
name tags, clothing labels, status, the kind of car they 
would want, or the  house  they would  like  to  live  in. 
Everything is classified in terms of status, and they are 
preoccupied with a social-image positionality. 

When one reaches the level  of Truth and Courage 
(cal.  200),  the  world  now  appears  to  be  a  place  of 
opportunity.  It  is  an  exciting,  challenging  place  with 
opportunities for  growth  and  expansion. That person 
opens the newspaper and sees the endless opportuni­
ties for man to grow, to meet those challenges and even 
go beyond them, and to learn in the process. That per­
son is  excited about life. 

At the level of Neutral (cal. 250), life and the world 
is  'okay'  due  to  one's  being  nonattached.  Everything 
just becomes okay. One moves into an easygoing view 
of  the  world  and  begins  to  say,  "Well,  that's  human 
nature.That's the way it is. It's serving some kind of ulti­
mate purpose." 

The  people  who  move  on  up  to  the  level  of 
Willingness (cal. 310) experience the world as friendly. 
They walk  down  the  street, see  endless  friendliness, 
and think the universe is friendly no matter what they 
have.The world is harmonious, benign, and supportive. 
The persons who have moved on up to the level of 
Acceptance  (cal.  350)  really  begin  to  experience  the 
harmony  of life  and  discover  synchronicity  and  how 

36 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

everything just sort of flows together.They experience 
a world of cooperation because they are holding coop­
eration  as  their own energy field. This  helps  them to 
move up to Enthusiasm (cal. 390), and into Lovingness 
(cal. 500) and the experience of endless loving support 
and the endless presence of that lOVing  energy in the 
universe. 

The states of illumination (cal. 600 and up) reveal 
the  incredible  beauty  and  perfection  of  life,  the 
absolute perfection of Creation, the actual experience 
of the  Divine  essence  and  nature  of all  life,  and  the 
incredible beauty of all its expressions. It is not just aes­
thetic beauty, which is  pleasing to the  senses, but the 
intrinsic beauty of Creation. When one walks down an 
alley,  which,  to  the  eye  of the  unenlightened  would 
look  ugly,  one  experiences  the  incredible  perfection 
and beauty of the aliveness of life  and begins to see all 
life  as  unfolding.  One  does  not  see  imperfection  but 
process. That  person  sees  the  entire  universe  as  the 
unfoldment of that perfection. 

Correlated with each of these various energy fields 
are the concordant view and depictions of Divinity. For 
example, the person in apathy and hopelessnessexpe­
riences  God  as  uncaring  or  nonexiStent. The  person 
who is in this energy field sometimes says, "I believe in . 
God, but 1 feel  he wouldn't have  anything to do with 
me because 1 am just a  worm and worthless. 1 am  so 
worthless that God just ignores me:' 

The  person who  lives  in fear  projects  a  punitive, 
frightening, terrifying image  of God. The  person who 
lives in frustration feels separated from God.That is the 
God who constantly withholds from them that which 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

37 

would allow them to be happy; therefore, God is  non­
supportive. The person in anger expects  a  retaliatory, 
punishing God, and because these things go together, 
this  is  the  God  who  is  really  demonic, the  God  who 
really hates us and threatens to throw us into hell. He 
is  the ultimate destroyer, the punisher, the God who is 
revengeful and jealous. It is an anthropomorphic depic­
tion of a God who is fitfully jealous, 'hates sinners', and 
is given to emotional extremes of destructiveness. 

When we get up to the level of Pride, there are two 
directions  to  take  because  of  the  arrogance  of  the 
inflated ego. The atheist is  on one side and the zealot, 
bigot, and unbalanced extremist is on the other. 

As  we  move  up  to  Courage, which is  the  level  of 
Truth, God can primarily be a  question  mark. For the 
first time, because we are now approaching the level of 
Truth,  we  can  then  have  an  open  mind  and  say, 
"Actually,  I  really  don't  know  about  God.  It's  only 
hearsay that comes from all I've read and heard, and all 
that religion teaches. It is  really other people's experi­
ences in other times and places. On the witness stand, 
frankly,  I  would  have  to  say  I  don't  know  anything 
about God," so there is the question mark.The spiritual 
seeker really begins at this level. The person says, "I, of 
my own self, would like  to know what is  the truth of 
this." The person is  then free  to move  into the God of 
one's own inner experience and understanding. 

At the level of Neutral, one begins to experience a 
world of okayness and God as freedom. One begins to 
discover  that  there  is  no  punitive,  hateful,  negative 
God at all because one has moved out of those ener­
gy fields.  Instead, there  is  a  God  of absolute, infInite 

38 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

freedom allowing one to expand, explore, become, and 
fulfill one's potential. 

At  the  friendly  level  of Willingness, one  begins  to 
experience God as something that is perhaps helpful, 
promising,  hopeful,  and  now  positive.  Down  at  the 
bottom of the Map, it was negative, but at this level, it 
opens to candidness and freedom and now begins to 
look optimistic. The person on this level experiences 
life as harmonious and realizes that God is all merciful. 
The person in lOVingness  then begins  to  experience 
the God of unconditional love and the ever presence 
of the  love  of God  as  the  source  of one's  happiness 
and life. 

As  we move  into  joy and the  awareness  of beauty 

and perfection as the divine essence of all things with­
in the  oneness and  unity of God, we  move up to the 
top of the Map, with God as  Beingness, Isness, Reality, 
Truth, and the Eternal Source of Existence. 

There is now a context that will give a background 
and  a  way  to  see  one's  spiritual  work  and  progress 
from a different perspective.We can see healing from a 
different  viewpoint  and  also  how  to  approach  that 
great enigma called the ego. The energy fields  of com­
passion are at 540 and up; the people here are  forgiv­
ing and benign. 

Students of spiritual work are often those who are 
perfecting  the  levels  of  the  400s,  where  they  have 
acquired  a  dedicated  learningness  and  knowledge 
about  spiritual  matters. They  then  put  the  principles 
into practice  in  order to  reach the  500s. Some  join A 
Course in Miracles or Twelve-Step groups and are con­
cerned with perfecting the capacity to love.They move 

A  MAP  0  F  CON S C IOU S N E S S 

39 

up  to transcending what the world calls  the  ego and 
lose  attraction to  money, wealth, power, sexuality, and 
worldly success. 

To  repeat: the  bottom of the  Map  is  the world  of 
havingness. It  is  what  one  has  that  counts, and status 
comes from that. At  the bottom, people want to know 
what  others  have  and  rate  them  accordingly.  In  the 
middle of the Map is the world of doingness. Here, peo­
ple want to know what others do in the world.What is 
their  position  and  function?  Havingness  is  no  longer 
impressive. 

At  the  lower  levels,  possessions  are  desired  and 

esteemed, but  with progress  in the  evolution  of con­
sciousness, they are  no longer so  impressive  because 
everybody knows that if someone works seven days a 
week at two jobs, they can have all they want, so hav­
ingness no longer has status.As one moves towards the 
top of the Map, it is not what one has or does but what 
one is. People seek that person out now for what they 
have  become,  which  is  the  truth  they  have  owned 
about themselves.We seek out those people because of 
what they are  and do not even care what they have. I 
have known people like that for many years and never 
actually knew what they did occupationally. 

Utilizing this knowledge, we have an understanding 
of many  things. The  way  to  heal  the  small  self  is  to 
reject  taking a  polarized, right/wrong position, which 
makes it our enemy, and instead view life  with loving 
compassion  and  see  the  intrinsic  innocence  of  the 
child. We  first  see  the  innocence  of the  child's  con­
sciousness and then the programming that is  superim­
posed. It is  because of the child's lovingness and trust­

40 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ingness that it is so programmable, and we begin to see 
the innocence even within those who seem most hate­
ful. Out of compassion to see into the hearts of things, 
one fInds  the intrinsic  innocence within the  ego that 
then gets healed through that compassion and love.We 
can love our humanness and that of others, and instead 
of condemning it, we now say, "I see the seeming valid­
ity of that at that time." 

For example, instead of being ashamed of anger and 
hatred,  we  say  to  ourselves,  "Well,  being  angry  was 
inevitable  at  that  time,"  because  a  person  who  has 
never hated will not move up to Love  since they have 
never cared that much about life. If one does not care 
enough  about  life  to  have  gotten  angry  and  actually 
hated, then they would be down at the level ofApathy. 
When  we  look  at  our humanness  from  the  view­
point of forgiveness and compassion, we can then love 
it and hold it within our greatness.We look at our small­
ness  like  we  look  at  the  child  and  begin  to  heal  it 
through understanding and compassion. When we  do 
this, we are putting forth a very powerful energy fIeld 
that is  healing. When we look at ourselves from  com­
passion and lovingness, we begin to heal. We  also now 
know that what we forgive in others is forgiven within 
ourselves  and  disappears  from  our perception  of the 
world. 

Our perception of the world begins to shift, and we 
begin to experience a world that is  totally different. It 
is  like  putting on a  different pair of colored glasses­
the world is not the same, and we can experience it in 
a totally different manner. 

The  purpose  of the  Map  of Consciousness  is  to 

A  MAP  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

41 

create  a  context from  which to view and experience 
the world and see that it presents whole new avenues 
that  begin  to  open  up  automatically.  Our  intention, 
which is  the capacity to heal ourselves as  well as  oth­
ers, is  now facilitated.  It is  the fulfillment  of our own 
potential as we see ourselves move forward in our own 
realization of the truth. 

From  the  Brain  Function  and  Physiology  chart 
(next page), we can see the profound influence of the 
levels  of consciousness  on brain  physiology and con­
comitant neurotransmitters. Important is that from cal­
ibration level  200 and up, there is  a  release  of endor­
phins, which  is  accompanied  by  feelings  of pleasure 
and happiness. Below consciousness level 200, there is 
a  predominance of adrenaline and animal-instinct sur­
vival  responses. In contrast, consciousness levels  over 
200  are  termed 'welfare  emotions', which  are  benign 
and  signify  the  emergence, and  eventually  the  domi­
nance, of spiritual energies. 

42 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

BRAIN FUNCTION AND PHYSIOLOGY
 

Lower Mind (Below 200) 

Hippocampus 

Higher Mind (Above 200) 

Hippocampus 

E:)  c::v 

Above 200
Right-brain dominance 
Non-linear 
Peace-Endorpbdns 
Positive emotion 
Support thymus 

AKiller cells 
AImmunity 
Healing 
Balanced acupuncture system 
Positive muscle response 

Below 200 
Left-brain dominance 
Linear 
Stress-Adrenaline 
Fight or flight 
Alarm-Resistance-Exhaustion 
(Selye-Cannon: Fight/Flight) 

YKiller cells and immunity 
Thymus stress 
Disrupt acupuncture meridian 
Disease 
Negative muscle response 
Y Neurotransmitters-Serotonin 

Track to emotions twice as fast 
as through prefrontal cortex 
to emotions 

Track to emotions slower 
than from prefrontal 
and etheric cortexes 

Pupil dilates 

Pupil constricts 

Importance: 
Spiritual endeavor and intention change the brain function and 
the body's physiology and establish a  specific area for spiritual 
information  in  the  right-brain prefrontal  cortex and its  concor­
dant etheric (energy) brain. 

CHAPTER  2 

Assisting Healing 

In the previous chapter, we explored the utilization of 
knowledge that arises from studying the nature of con­
sciousness  itself  and  its  applications  to  mankind's 
problems, especially in the areas of suffering. Now we 
will explore the origin of illness and the letting go of it. 
This  will  not  be  about  philosophies  or  theories; 
instead, it will concern what can be clinically verified 
in our own personal experiences-that which is  true 
because we can validate it. This is  the basis of clinical 
science-the ability to repeatedly duplicate and verify 
an  observation  within  our  own  personal  experience 
and  apply  it  to  our  individual  problems  to  see  if it 
works. Essentially, we are expressing empirical pragma­
tism. We  will  believe  what  we  can  prove  to  be  true 
through our own experience. 

It  is  important  to  again  explore  the  relationship 
between body, mind, and spirit. It is a useful model that 
is experientially real.What is the nature of spirit? Is that 
just a  concept, a metaphysical extraction, a philosoph­
ical position, or is  it a  conflrmable reality? What is the 
exact nature of body, mind, and spirit? 

In order to facilitate healing, it is essential to under­
stand the relationship between the body, the mind, and 
the spirit. It is important to know that the body has no 
capacity  to  experience  itself; it is  insentient. The  arm 
cannot experience its armness nor can the leg experi­
ence its legness. Instead, we experience the sensations 
of the body and where it is  in space. Sensations, curi­
ously  enough,  also  have  no  capacity  to  experience 

43 

44 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

themselves.They have to be experienced in something 
that  is  greater, which  is  mind. The  experience  of the 
sensations and what they report about the body is actu­
ally experienced within the mind. 

As surprising as it may seem, the mind cannot expe­
rience  itself.  A  thought  cannot  experience  its  own 
thoughtness; a feeling cannot experience its  own feel­
ingness; memory cannot experience its own memory­
ness. They  all  have  to  be  experienced  in  something 
greater than the mind. The principle is  that each thing 
is experienced from an energy field that is less restricted 
and less  limited; each is  always  experienced in some­
thing  that  is  greater. Therefore,  mind  is  experienced 
because  of  the  energy  field  of  consciousness  itself. 
Consciousness is formless, infinite, and analogous to a 
movie  screen  upon  which  we  experience  the  move­
ment of the movie. It is because of consciousness that 
we  experience  what  is  in  mind. That  is  the  basis  of 
anesthesia  in  that  when  we  remove  consciousness, 
there is no experience of either the mind or the body. 
Consciousness itself is  experienced in the  infinite 
energy  field  caped  awareness.  Because  of awareness, 
we know what is going on in consciousness. Because 
of consciousness, we know what is  going on in mind. 
Because of mind, we know what the senses are report­
ing about the body.Thus, we can see that what we really 
are is  several levels removed from the body, making it 
rather clear that we are not the body.We are that which 
is aware within that infinite field of consciousness.This 
is  very· important  to  realize, and  in  meditation, it  is 
relatively  simple  to  verify  the  truth  that  one  is  that 
which is aware of all these levels of reality. 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

45 

We  will focus  on the  actual techniques  that  assist 
healing, including  how they occur and  how to  apply 
them. We  will also focus  on the basic principles, such 
as how the source of illness is often unconsCious guilt 
plus a specific belief system that is  aggravated by sup­
pressed  emotions.  I  will  describe  how  I  used  these 
techniques  and understandings to  heal  myself of more 
than twenty chronic, intractable illnesses that had been 
totally  refractory,  or  resistant,  to  traditional  medical 
treatment. 

With a  step-by-step  approach, we will  see how ill­
ness is  also  a  result of programming via the collective  . 
consciousness (and how not to buy into it), and how it 
comes about as a result of belief systems.We will learn 
that one can recover from illnesses within the parame­
ters of karmic inheritance.There is no order of difficulty, 
no  matter how severe  the  illness  may sound. We  will 
learn how to energize the self-healer that is present via 
Nature  in all  of us, and we will look at the phenome­
non of multiple personalities, which demonstrates the 
truth of much of the following information. 

Science  and  psychiatry  are  studying  the  clinical 
condition  of  multiple  personalities  with  increasing 
interest because it explains so many different phenom­
ena.  In  this  condition,  more  than  one  personality 
expresses  itself through  the  body.  Clinically,  one  per­
sonality  may  have  multiple  illnesses,  such  as  asthma, 
allergies, gout, and many others, but when that person­
ality leaves and the other personality comes in, the sec­
ond one may well have none of those illnesses whatso­
ever. That  personality  says, "I  don't  believe  in  any  of 
those things. I  am not subject to them." As a  result, we 

46 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

will look at the power of the mind over body. 

A basic principle of recovery is that we are subject 
to  what  we  hold  in  mind,  which  may,  however,  be 
unconscious  (out  of awareness). We  will  refer  to  the 
Map  of  Consciousness  to  make  this  understandable 
rather than sound mystical or puzzling in our expres­
sions. It is helpful to remember that the direction of the 
energy  fields  indicates  whether  it  is  a  negative  field 
with a destructive influence or a positive field. Knowing 
this will enable us to feel confident that we are operat­
ing  from  something  that  is  reasonable,  confirmable, 
and understandable. 

Sharing my personal experiences demonstrates the 
basic  truths  being presented  here. You  already  know 
these things intuitively, but in making them conscious, 
you can use them as therapeutic tools, such as  how to 
prevent  being  programmed  by  a  negative  belief sys­
tem, or how not to buy into a thought system.The mind 
is so powerful that what it believes tends to manifest. 
An interesting study appeared in the January 1987 
issue  of Brain-Mind Bulletin  entitled  "Expectancies: 
What You  See  Is  What They  Give You."  Research  by 
Princeton University showed that self-fulfilling prophecy 
is  just  that,  and  what  we  actively  believe  tends  to 
manifest in our behavior and in that of others. This is 
what they call a "creative social reality;' a  serious issue 
that affects  everything from  stock prices to the  arms 
race, not to mention everyday interactions (and, addi­
tionally, the details of one's personal health). 

We will proceed from the premise·that all phenom­
ena are experienced in consciousness and address the 
level of consciousness itself and its expression in mind. 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

47 

We  will go to the level of cause instead of the level of 
effect.The body is at the effect of what is held in mind. 
If we want to  know what we are  holding in mind, all 
we have to do is look at what is going on in the body 
and  observe  its  behavior,  which  tells  us  what  we 
believe. If we look back into our memory, we often will 
not be able  to  recall  that we  had any such belief sys­
tem, or that we thought it applied to us.The fact that it 
is in our life tells us that it must have been there some­
where in the personal or collective unconscious. 

The most common example of this occurs in peo­
ple  who  are  allergic  and  say, "Well,  I  didn't  have  any 
belief in allergies. I  didn't bring this  into my life  con­
sciously:'  Yet,  if  we  go  back  into  their  childhoods, 
almost  invariably  we  find  that  the  belief system  and 
allergies occurred very early in life, usually at ages two 
or three.The little child picks up a remark by someone 
in the family  such as, "Allergies run in our family." The 
minute  the  child's  mind  hears  this,  buys  it,  and,  of 
course, believes it, it becomes an operative program. 

A lot of the phenomena we see  expressing in the 
body of the adult were picked up very early in life from 
a chance remark heard on television, or something mis­
understood in a book, or a remark that a teacher made. 
These  things  constitute  suggestive  programming  and 
common belief systems  and become conscious when 
we begin to work on them. 

We  are  subject to what we hold in mind, so what 
does that mean? What is the nature of illness itself? We 
see,  ftrst  of  all,  it  is  that  of  pain  and  suffering. 
Consequently, it is  obvious and merely common sense 
that illness is an expression of pain and suffering.When 

48 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

we look at the Map  of Consciousness, pain and suffer~ 
ing  are  located  at  the  lower  energy  levels,  with  the 
energy field in a negative direction, meaning that it has 
an adverse effect on our life.Then we have to look into 
the  nature  of guilt, the  unconscious  guilt, and  how it 
expresses itself. 

The  thought  patterns  in  the  mind  are  belief  sys­
tems.  Guilt  stems  from  judgmentalism  and  negative 
opinions. Negative  feelings  tend to  go together, so  all 
the negative feelings then contribute to illriess, includ­
ing pride, anger, desire, fear, grief, apathy, and guilt. We 
know that when we test a person's muscle strength, if 
they hold anything in mind below the energy level of 
Courage, such as  prideful or angry thoughts, wanting­
ness  or cravingness, a fearful  thought, some grief, apa­
thy,  or a  guilty thought, the  muscle  goes weak. Other 
feelings, such as regret, loss, hopelessness, despair, self­
hatred, worry, anxiety, grievances, and any kind of arro­
gance  or contempt  also  result  in  a  person's  instantly 
going  weak with muscle-strength  testing. (The  pupils 
also dilate.) 

The muscle weakness and pupil dilation represent 
. desynchronization of the cerebral hemispheres and an 
instant  weakening  of the  body's  energy  field.  It  also 
indicates something that is deleterious to life. Through 
this method, we can prove to anyone that any negative 
thought or feeling desynchronizes the body's acupunc­
ture energy system, which is more responsive than the 
central  nervous  system  and  far  more  rapid  than  the 
autonomic sympathetic nervous system. 

The  body's  acupuncture  energy  system,  via  the 
twelve main meridians of the body, instantly responds 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

49 

to  anything  that  is  negative  because  all  the  energy 
fields below the level of Courage at 200 represent that 
which is  not the truth. That then brings in the whole 
energy field and thought system of being a victim.As a 
sick person, we view ourself as a victim of the disease. 
Therefore, it is  important to realize  that there is  the ill­
ness,  and  there  is  the  person  who  has  the  illness. We 
then understand  that  the  person  who  has  that  illness 
needs to change in order for it to disappear.We are going 
to learn about recovering from a specific illness, including 
how to handle the actual event on the physical, psycho­
logical, emotional, and mental levels, and how we must 
change as a being so that healing becomes automatic. 

The Map of Consciousness shows that all the nega­
tive emotions facilitate illness, and all the positive emo­
tions tend to cure illness. Once we get above the level 
of Courage, a  level  that we  cross  by telling  the  truth 
about  things,  we  become  detached,  which  opens  a 
space for us to become a willing, accepting, and loving 
person. On the calibrated scale, Love occurs at 500 and 
Healing appears at 540.What kind of lovingness brings 
about an almost automatic healing within the body? It 
is  unconditional love, that which is  nonjudgmental, for­
giving, and aligned with understanding and compassion. 
Love sees, nurtures and supports all of life and honors its 
sacredness, and of itself creates a healing energy field that 
calibrates at 540. 

How do we become the kind of person in whom 
healing begins to  occur automatically because  of the 
level  and  general  nature  of our  consciousness? At 
the same time, how do we facilitate the healing of a 
specific illness? 

50=--

-=.H::...:E=-:..:Ac.::L:...::I-=.N.:-G=-----.:A::..::...:...N:....:D=---R::..::...=E--=C:....:O=---V--=E:....:R::..::...:...Y 

_ 

In viewing  the  specifics  of an illness, we will  talk 
about certain mechanics of consciousness and how to 
use some of the techniques presented here and in later 
chapters.We have to begin by letting go of resisting the 
sensations that we are experiencing and stop labeling 
them. For example, we cannot experience a 'duodenal 
ulcer'  or 'asthma'. They  are  labels,  mental  constructs, 
elaborate  programs,  and  belief  systems.  We  cannot 
experience 'asthma', but what do we experience? This 
is where the technique of radical truth comes up. 

We go into the inner experience of the exact sensa­
tions  and  let  go  of resisting  them.  In  effect,  we  will 
eventually disappear them through aligning with them 
by welcoming the inner experiences of the sensations. 
At the same time, within mind we cancel any labels.We 
stop  calling it an 'ulcer' and instead go  into the inner 
sensation of it. The inner sensation may be a  pressure 
or a  burning. Even  the words 'burning' and 'pressure' 
are labels and names.We cancel those and again go into 
the core, the absolute essential, of what we are physi­
cally  experiencing,  and  then  let  go  of resisting  that 
experience. 

The actual healing of the physicality of the illness is 
letting go of resisting the inner physical experience of 
it without any mentallabe1.At the same time, in fact, we 
begin to cancel the mental label and replace it with the 
truth. We  cancel  by afftrming, "I  no  longer  believe  in 
that. I am an inftnite being, and I am not subject to that. 
I am only subject to what I hold in mind." 

What does it mean to be "an inftnite being and not 
subject to that"?  It means we are  only limited by our 
belief systems, and if we let them go, what takes their 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

51 

place? If form is removed from consciousness, what is 
left? The formless is  left, and the inner experience of it 
is  infInite, without  boundaries, without  beginning  or 
end. The formless  is  the essential nature of conscious­
ness itself and is  unlimited. If we place a  limitation or 
introject form, then we subject ourself to what we are 
holding in mind.To replace it, we consciously cancel it 
by saying, "I  cancel any  belief in duodenal  ulcers," or 
asthma, or whatever the illness might be. We then say, 
"I'm subject only to that which 1 hold in mind. 1 am an 
infinite being, and in truth, 1 am not subject to that.And 
that is a fact." 

When we muscle test that statement, we ftnd  it to 
be true. If we test a person and they say, "Cancel. 1 am 
not subject to that. 1 am an infInite being and subject 
only  to  what 1  hold  in  mind,"  we  will  see  that  they 
instantly go strong, indicating that this is a statement of 
the truth. Consequently, when we replace that which is 
false with that which is true, healing occurs. 

What is the ~ffect  on our energy field in conscious­
ness?  Falsity  by its  nature  puts  us  below  the  level  of 
200 and throws us into a negative energy field, Which, 
in and of itself, brings about illness. The minute we tell 
the  truth,  the  energy  field  at  the  level  of  Courage 
(meaning to tell the truth that we are an 'infmite being 
and  subject  only  to  what  is  held  in  mind')  instantly 
puts us above the line at level 200). 

The willingness to accept this truth lifts us up to a 
position to choose appreciation of the body instead of 
the 'make wrong' of the body; the lovingness of our life 
instead of the 'make wrong' of our life; the lovingness 
of the being that we are instead of the criticism of it. 

52 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

We  fmd  that  we  have  to  let  go  of criticism, 'attack' 
thoughts,  critical  thoughts,  and  judgmental  thoughts. 
We  have to let go of putting ourselves in the position 
of being right and making other people wrong because 
the level  of 'right and wrong' is  at the energy level  of 
about 180, which is that of negative thought forms. In 
other words, it has a  deleterious  effect  on our health 
and life energy. If we are willing to let go of our illness, 
then we have to be willing to let go of the attitude that 
brought about the illness because disease is an expression 
of one's attitude and habitual way of looking at things. 
The specifics of healing a  particular illness  consist 
of (1) letting go of resisting the sensory experience of 
it, (2) no longer putting names or labels on it, and (3) 
using no words at all.Welcome experiencing what you 
are experiencing in a very radical way and at the same 
time (4) cancel the thought form and belief system, and 
(5) choose the energy field of Love, which heals. 

If we  look  at  the  basic  physics  of  the  energies 
involved, we can see why fear at calibration level  100 
is overpowered by Love at 500 because these are expo­
nential powers. Therefore, the power of Love  is  repre­
sented by 500  x  10, whereas Fear is  only  100 x  10, a 
very big difference. 

To  put oneself in an energy field  of 540 is to auto­
matically heal oneself. A loving thought then heals, and 
a negative thought creates illness. Choosing to become 
a loving person results in the release of endorphins by 
the  brain, which has  a  profound effect on the body's 
health and happiness (see Brain Physiology Chart, pg. 
42). Happiness arises from the willingness to let go of 
that which is negative and to allow love to replace it in 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

53 

consciousness  because  the  essential  nature  of  con­
sciousness, unless  it has  been impaired, is  lovingness. 
We  see this in the young child who is only innocence, 
and  lovingness  is  the  expression  of  the  essence  of 
human nature. It is as if the child has not yet been pro­
grammed to go into fear, doubt, or limitation. 

It is essential to capture that essential expression of 
lovingness in order to help any illness within us, as well 
as to let go of the negativity of the belief system. How 
do  we  pick  up  the  negative  belief systems? We  pick 
them up through television and well-intentioned peo­
ple.Their intention is to prevent these illnesses in us by 
educating  us  about  them.  Instead,  we  fmd  that  the 
mind  is  now  programmed  to  accept  a  specific  belief 
system. Unconscious guilt  then comes up and utilizes 
that  belief  system,  which  causes  an  impairment  of 
energy  flowing  through  the  energy  fields  that  run 
down  through  the  twelve  meridians  of the  acupunc­
ture energy system. 

For example, every time someone -goes below level 
200  (Courage), we  find  upon  testing  them  that  their 
energy  system  is  imbalanced.  Characteristically,  most 
people  will  'blowout'  one  particular  acupuncture 
meridian rather than another. For example, every time 
they have negative thoughts or feelings consequent to 
a  negative  belief  system,  they  may  impair  the  heart 
meridian. As  the  years  go  by,  every time  they  have  a 
resentment, go into self-pity, or criticize someone else, 
it disrupts the energy and flows down the heart merid­
ian. This  depletes the ·life  energy of the heart, and the 
continual  repetition  begins  to  alter  its  physiology  in 
very delicate ways. It begins  to express itself through 

54 

- - - -

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

irregularities in the autonomic nervous system, which 
operates in the functioning of the body organs. 

As a result, there begins an impairment of the phys­
iology  of the  heart  itself,  including  the  lining  of the 
arteries. As  the years go  by, the.  habiral disruption  of 
the heart meridian brings  impairme~~ on the physical 
level, which is  an expression of what has been held in 
mind. That  is  the  basic  premise-the body  expresses 
what is held in mind, not vice versa.The body expresses 
a person's habitual way of thinking. 

The  mechanics  of  negativity  short-circuit  the 

acupuncture  system  and  the  autonomic  nervous  sys­
tem.This in turn alters and impairs the sensitive electri­
cal  and  chemical  processes  that  are  going  on  in  the 
cells,  resulting  in  pathological  changes  within  the 
anatomy  and  dysfunction  that  results  in  a  coronary 
attack, heart disease, or heart failure. The heart failure 
comes about partly as a result of years of negative men­
tal attitudes.The mind would like to blame it on choles­
terol, stress, one's lifestyle, genetics, what goes on in the 
family,  an.d  so  on. These  are  all  merely  explanations, 
excuses, and rationalizations to try to make intelligible 
that which is not clearly defmed. 

When looking  at the  exact mechanics, we  see  that 
what we hold in mind begins to manifest on the physical 
plane because it is the mind that has the power. Even a 
relatively neutral thought can have major consequences. 
For example, one has the  thought, "I  think 1 will go  to 
Hawaii:'That one thought now energizes one's finances 
and determines what one is going to do over the next six 
months  to  get  ready  for  the  trip. The  thought  held  in 
mind now determines what one does with their money, 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

55 

their entire behavior, the packing, and moving their body 
thousands  of miles  through  the  air. That  one  thought 
influences the next six months of one's life. 

We  can see how powerful the mind is, and one of 

the difficulties  to overcome in self-healing  is  the will­
ingness to accept the great power of the mind.We can­
not let a  negative thought go  unchallenged. One can­
not say, "I  have diabetes" and let that go unchallenged. 
That is a belief system so powerful that just believing "I 
have  diabetes" is  sufficient  to  potentiate  the  disease. 
Instead, one has to cancel it and say,"I am a person who 
once thought that, but I am only subject to what I hold 
in mind. I am an infinite being, and I am not subject to 
that."  One  releases  any  symptoms  and  cancels  them. 
One  replaces  them with the  truth, and in  doing  that, 
one moves above the line in the specifics of a  given 
illness. Later, when I give an account of how I used this 
system to get rid of many illnesses within myself, per­
haps these principles will become more apparent. 

Because I had such a list of illnesses, I had to write 
them all down in order to remember them because half 
of them have been forgotten even though all of them 
lasted for many, many years. For example, I had a  duo­
denal ulcer that was intractable. I was o'n  all the tradi­
tional  medicinal  treatments  and  had  psychoanalysis 
and  a  whole  variety  of things  that  began  in  medical 
school. Twenty years later, I still had the ulcer, and not 
only that, it was a different kind of ulcer that was mak­
ing holes in other parts of my duodenum. It was threat­
ening to perforate and hemorrhage, and it was creating 
recurrent attacks of pancreatitis. I also had colitis along 
with hemorrhage diverticulitis. In fact, the diverticulitis 

56 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

was so bad that I landed in the hospital several times 
and had to have transfusions. I  almost hemorrhaged to 
death with it. 

In  addition,  I  had  migraine  headaches  that  were 
intractable. Psychoanalysis had helped to some degree, 
and I had seen neurologists and famous world experts, 
but there was really  no help for the migraines, which 
were  ostensibly  associated with many  allergies. I  was 
also  sensitive  to  inhalants  in  the  atmosphere. I  could 
not walk into a place that had been exterminated with­
in the previous couple of weeks because I could detect 
one part in one  million  in the  spray and would react 
with a migraine headache. 

In addition, I also had Raynaud's disease, which was 
impairing the blood flow to my extremities, and I had 
threatening insipient gangrene of the fingertips, circu­
latory impairment of the hands and feet, and was cold 
all  the time. On top of all  that, I  had gout and a  high 
uric acid level. Of course, I was on a diet for that. I had 
gouty  arthritis  and  carried  a  cane  and  medication  in 
the back of my car. Can you imagine carrying a cane in 
the back of your car because when gout comes on",  it 
happens very suddenly with pain that is very paralyz­
ing? That cane was in my car for many years. 

At  the  same  time,  I  had  severe  hypoglycemia.  I 
could not eat sugar, sweets, or starches. So, in addition 
to  all  the  allergies,  the  ulcer,  diverticulitis,  other  gas­
trointestinal problems, pancreatitis, and occasional gall­
bladder attacks, there were  actually very few  things  I 
could eat.When I occasionally went to a restaurant, the 
only thing  I  could  safely  eat  was  lettuce  in  a  salad.  I 
could  not  eat  the  tomatoes  because  the  seeds  might 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

57 

aggravate the diverticulitis, which had required hospi­
talization and blood transfusions in the past. I was also 
fIfty  pounds  overweight.  (I  will  later  describe  how  I. 
handled that problem.) 

From one end to the other, things were wrong with 
the  gastrointestinal  tract;  the  circulatory  system;  the 
digestive  system;  the  hormonal  balance;  the  blood 
chemistries, including  elevated  blood  cholesterol  and 
uric  acid  levels;  and  migraine  headaches.  All  these 
things indicated stress and pressure within the central 
nervous  system  and  impairment  of  the  autonomic 
nervous  system. Additionally,  I  had  a  pilonidal  cystic 
tumor,  which  normally  would  require  surgery,  but  it 
slowly disappeared spontaneously. 

Later, I went into severe heart failure  from  undiag­
nosed Grave's disease (hyperthyroidism) for which sur­
gery or radiation was prescribed, but I refused. Chest x­
rays revealed a tumor in the apex of the right lung.The 
lung was  biopsied, resulting in its  collapse  and pneu­
mothorax (the collection of air or gas in the space sur­
rounding  the  lungs).  The  biopsy  revealed  that  the 
lesion  was  a  form  of aviary  (bird)  tuberculosis  (non­
communicable to humans). I refused to take the recom­
mended $10,OOo-per-month's worth of five antibiotics, 
which  had  a  low  cure  rate  anyway. The  lung  lesion 
slowly  disappeared  with  no  physical  treatment. The 
heart failure  cleared up, as  did the pneumothorax. The 
thyroid  function  eventually  returned  to  normal  with­
out surgery or radiation. In addition to the above, the 
left thumb was amputated while I was doing carpentry 
work and was repaired in surgery without anesthesia, 
as  was  a  recurrent right  inguinal  hernia, also  without 

58 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

All 

the  above 

anesthesia.The chronic recurrent, intractable duodenal 
ulcers disappeared after three acupuncture treatments. 
illnesses  and  surgeries  were 
processed  and  handled  as  described  by letting  go  of 
resisting in every instant, canceling the belief systems, 
and totally surrendering to Divine Will. All healing was 
accomplished  without  narcotics  or  anesthesia.  The 
whole  series  of illnesses  was  consequent  to  karmic 
proclivities that were surfaced by intense inner spiritual 
work, which speeded up their emergence initially but 
later facilitated their seemingly miraculous healing and 
disappearance. 

Mental  systems  had  to  be  questioned  to  fmd  out 

what was going on because it was obvious that a per­
son with so many illnesses could hardly be said to be 
free of conflict. I began to study my perfectionism and 
see  how this  tendency, which  allowed  me  to  forgive 
others but did not allow me to forgive myself, was cre­
ating an intolerance of my own humanness.As you can 
see, to be intolerant and condemn and attack all these 
things  within  oneself  produces  unconscious  guilt 
about one's own human limitations. 

The origin of this mental proclivity began in child­

hood in the form of moral scrupulosity and fear of sin. 
I had to move to a willingness to accept, love, and for­
give my own humanness, acknowledge that it was only 
human  to  have  imperfect  feelings,  and  to  let  go  of 
attacking  myself for  being human. Therefore, I  had to 
look into the essence of seeing what is  the inner core 
and essence  of one's humanness. This  took me to the 
awareness of the intrinsic innocence within conscious­
ness itself. I then had to look at the nature of conscious­

ASSISTING  HEALING 

59 

ness. How does the child, in its innocence and lack of 
negativity, end up with so  many programs within the 
mind to create all these illnesses? 

We can find the answer when we look at the nature 
of innocence and track what happens to it in the child. 
The child's innocence might also  be compared to  the 
hardware of a computer.The hardware is innocent, and 
it is  the software that goes through the hardware, cre­
ating the output. However, the hardware is not affected 
by the software itself. We look at the child and see the 
innocence of its consciousness. How does all the nega­
tive  programming  come  in  to  the  innocent  child?  It 
comes in because of innocence; the child believes any­
thing it is  told. 

It is out of its lovingness and trust of its parents, its 
teachers, and the world of television, commercials, and 
society that the child becomes programmed.The inno­
cence of the child becomes progressively less apparent 
because  it  is  now  displaying  all  the  programs  it  has 
picked up  out of that primary innocence. It starts  to 
believe  the  prejudices  of  its  parents  and  playmates, 
such as little sly remarks like, "We  don't play with cer­
tain kinds of people."What buys that negative program? 
It is  the innocence of the child, which remains within 
our  consciousness  throughout  our  life.  It  is  always 
going on. It is  out of that innocence that we buy into 
error,  but  the  inner  innocence  itself is  unsullied. We 
have to go back into the recognition of that inner inno­
cence in order to forgive  ourselves as well as  others. 

That inner innocence  allows  us  to  learn anything 
new:The innocence of the child never changes; in fact, it 
is  the innocence of the child within you that is  reading 

60 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

these words this very second. It never changes; it is that 
same trusting, believing, and 'hoping to hear the truth 
and be open to it' innocence that continues. Even if you 
do not believe what you are reading now, it is because 
some opposite program within your mind says, "Don't 
trust." And it was your innocence that bought the pro­
gram of "Don't trust anybody:' 

Even the mistrusting person is doing so out of trust. 
They  are  trusting  the  truth  of that  statement. Maybe 
one  day  their  father  said,  "Don't  trust  anybody  out 
there," and it was their innocence that bought the dis­
trust.  Yet  the  innocence  itself  is  unsullied  and 
untouched because it never changes. It is the inherent 
nature of consciousness itself. It is the hardware of the 
computer, and no matter how many negative thoughts 
were heard, the programs that are played through the 
mind do not affect the hardware, leaving it untouched, 
unsullied, pristine, and pure. That inner pristine purity 
is still within all of us. 

That bring us to compassion because we now see 
how we picked up programs as we grew up in youth 
or adolescence. For example, we do not want to admit 
that we have  negative  thoughts, feelings, or even fear, 
or  that  we  have  desire  or  feelings  of loss,  regret,  or 
hopelessness.These are not acceptable.The self-hatred 
and guilt then accumulate from the constant rejection 
.  of our own humanness.As a result, we have to move to a 
better, healing way of being with ourself. It is easy to do 
by merely choosing to be compassionate and forgiving. 
The  decision  came  to  me  to  be  that  way  about 
myself, the same as I was about others, because if I am 
that way about myself, then automatically I am that way 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

61 

about others. That which I forgive  in others I automat­
ically  forgive  in  myself because  all  I  am  seeing  out 
there is  myself projected into the world. 

With  the  undoing  of  all  this  negativity  and  the 
replacement of the low negative energies by a positive 
energy, we  begin to  experience  the world, ourselves, 
and our relationship to life in a different way.We begin 
to experience an inner joyfulness as a result of our will­
ingness  to  let  go  of condemning  ourself and  others. 
This then becomes a habit and the way we are in the 
world. Intention  to  be  a  source  of healing  to  ourself 
and others sets up a context. 

What  does  context  mean?  Intention  sets  up  con­
text. Our intention to be this kind of person then sets 
up the whole energy of our consciousness and aligns it 
so that we begin to see things that way. In other words, 
there is  an actual alteration of perception. We  literally 
begin to see the world through forgiving, healing, and 
compassionate  eyes. We  are  not talking  about sympa­
thy, which is in the lower energy fields; we are talking 
about a lovingness as an inner decision to be that kind 
of human  being  towards  ourself and  others. There  is 
the willingness  to  let go  of being  critical, along with 
our moraliZing  'right  and  wrong' attitude  that  occurs 
when we polarize ourselves with others by saying, "My 
position is right and your position is wrong." 

Because  the  body  expresses  what  the  mind 
believes, this  decision then begins to  affect the body. 
We  can track down the mechanics of that with muscle 
testing. When we hold a loving thought in mind or pic­
ture somebody in a loving way, our arm is strong when 
someone tests its resistance.When we hold an unloving 

62 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

thought  in  mind,  the  arm  will  instantly  go  weak 
because  the  body  is  immediately  reflecting  what  the 
mind believes. 

As  we move into the decision to be forgiving  and 
compassionate, to be that which supports and nurtures 
life instead of condemning it or moralistically putting it 
down and getting into a 'make wrong' scenario, and as 
we become willing  to let go  of the 'make wrong', we 
let  go  of attacking  ourself for  being  ill.  Some  people 
who  are  involved  in  spiritual  work  or  metaphysical 
studies will compound the  problem by making them­
selves wrong because they have a physical illness. It is 
helpful  to have  the willingness  to accept whatever is 
being expressed on the  physical level, to look within 
our own consciousness to see what is being brought to 
our attention, and to see that whatever is occurring in 
our life is happening in order to come up to be healed. 
Instead  of being  ashamed  that  we  are  a  spiritual 
seeker  with  a  physical  illness,  we  instead  become 
thankful and say, "Aha!  Something is  coming up  to  be 
healed."We want that capacity to bring up the various 
things to be healed; thus, it is a sign of progress, not of 
falling back.We can be happy that we have a chance to 
heal  these  things  that,  paradoxically,  are  actually 
brought up  by major or rapid  spiritual  progress  (Le., 
karma).  Most  of  the  great  mystics  of  history  had 
records of many physical illnesses (e.g., see "Mystics" in 
Encyclopaedia Britannica). 

An illness is merely our consciousness calling atten­
tion to something that needs to be looked at. There is 
something about which we are feeling guilty, fearful, or 
other negative emotion.There is a belief system we are 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

63 

holding that has to be let go of and cancelled. There is 
something that has to be forgiven, and something with­
in us that has to be loved, so we thank: whatever it is for 
bringing it to our awareness. We  say, "Thank: you, ulcer. 
I see.You forced me to look at the way in which I was 
condemning myself and not loving myself. Thank: you, 
hypoglycemia, for showing me how much I have been 
living  in fear." We  thank:  all· our illnesses  because they 
have brought us to that willingness and acceptance to 
move into the field of lovingness and the joy of realiz­
ing now, out of compassion, that this is  how the body 
brings about self-healing. 

The pain serves a purpose, and we now hold it in a 
different way. We  are  going  to make lemonade  out of 
lemons.  Instead  of going  into  self-pity  or resentment 
about an illness, instead of 'poor me' or being a victim, 
we say, "What is  that trying  to  tell me? What is it that 
I'm supposed to  learn?" We  get interested in learning 
about  the  nature  of  consciousness  and  finding  out 
what is underlying the illness so we can heal it through 
a greater understanding. 

The first tools we need are willingness and an open 
mind-the willingness to say that the mind is looking 
at something which it is being asked to view so it can 
be healed. The  healing of the body comes about with 
the  healing  of  the  mind.  All  the  physical  illnesses, 
which I eventually let go of, fmally healed of their own 
nature as a result of healing the thought forms in mind. 
All  the healings resulted from the willingness to let go 
of the condemnation of self and others, to let go of crit­
icalness, self-pity, resentment, and all the negative ener­
gies  at  the  levels  below  200, including  regret, worry, 

64

=----

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

-----'=-=--=~=__=__=__'__=__=c.::..c....:=___=_=_=__=__=____=_=..::....::._ 

_ 

anxiety,  grievances,  self-contempt,  and  self  hatred.  It 
was the letting go of those things that shifted the ener­
gy field  to one that brought about the healing. I  kept 
working with it, canceling the belief systems of hypo­
glycemia and gout. As  each belief system would come 
up, I  would  cancel  it  and  say, "I  no  longer  believe  in 
that. I am no longer subject to that. It is  the result of a 
belief system, and I have the power to cancel it."Thus, 
we  begin  to  own that  we  have  the  power to  refuse, 
reject, and deny."I have the power to refuse that. I don't 
have to buy into that." 

Because these belief systems are so prevalent in our 
culture, we naively think that they must have a certain 
reality or else everybody would not believe them. The 
only reality they have is on the level of a thought form. 
The  fact  that  there  is  agreement  about  a  certain 
thought form  does  not give  it  a  reality.  It  only means 
that  there  is  an  agreement  about  it. Therefore,  I  can 
refuse  to buy into the  collective  belief systems  about 
all  these  various  diseases,  and  I  watch  as  those  pro­
grams come in. I refuse to believe in all the well-inten­
tioned educational programs about all these diseases­
hypoglycemia, gout, heart  disease,  cholesterol, etc. As 
each illness is devised, we become subject to it. We  are 
subject to what we believe in mind. 

If we think eating eggs is going to raise our choles­
terol, and we think raising  our cholesterol is  going to 
give  us  heart trouble, then  eating eggs  does raise  our 
cholesterol, and the cholesterol does give us heart trou­
ble because of the power of the mind. Mind is  so pow­
erful that it creates the thought form which manifests 
on the physical plane, thus becoming a physical reality. 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

65 

We can see that self-healing then really depends on the 
reversal  of the  usual  belief systems  of causality. What 
we  hold in mind  manifests  on the physical level;  it is 
not the  other way around. Eating  the  cholesterol  did 
not give us the heart problem; it was the belief that eat­
ing a lot of cholesterol gives us heart trouble. That is a 
very critical point to grasp.The belief system elucidates 
the entire disease picture. 

If we don't believe it, the illnesses disappear from 
the  body. At  the  same  time,  we  are  letting  go  of the 
sources  of  unconscious  guilt  and  stopping  the  rein­
forcement of the illnesses that comes from labeling and 
propagating them, thereby bringing about a fulftllment 
of our own self-prophecies and watchfulness. 

We  cannot allow the mind to come up with a belief 
system without challenging it. If the mind unconsciously 
has been working against us, and we have been unaware 
of how much power it has, we can turn it around and 
use that power on our own behalf.The same power that 
undid us can now work for us when we consciously uti­
lize  the power of mind. Now, when the thought comes 
up, "I  have hypoglycemia;' I stop it, I cancel it, and I say 
the truth: "I  am no longer subject to that. I am an inno­
cent being. I am no longer subject to that." 

Hypoglycemia  is  a  good  example  because  it  took 
me  a  considerable  amount  of time  to  undo that  one. 
After all, I had given lectures about it for many years. It 
was operative clinically within me as an actual physical 
reality. I did a lot of work on nutrition, especially on its 
relationship to addiction, and to alcoholism in particu­
lar. It was a very important issue. I was a ftrm  believer 
in it when I came to the understanding and realization 

66 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that my ftrm belief in it was then operating within my 
body, which was expressing my mind's belief in hypo­
glycemia. Therefore, I had to keep. canceling it repeat­
edly and stating the truth about it. Eventually, the con­
dition  of  severe  hypoglycemia  disappeared,  and  the 
abnormal  blood  sugars  corrected  themselves.  After 
many years with this disease, I ftnally let go of the belief 
system of hypoglycemia and recovered from it. It took 
about two years of using the technique. 

The  various  illnesses  disappeared  within  differing 
periods  of time.  Some  of them  disappeared  within  a 
matter of days; some even disappeared within an hour. 
Others  took months, and  the  hypoglycemia  took  the 
longest, other than a blocked Eustachian tube that took 
two years. (I forgot to include that on my list of illness­
es.) I never gained weight and no longer had any hypo­
glycemic symptoms; it just no longer existed in my life. 
There is the principle of watchfulness. Because the 
mind is  so powerful, we cannot let it get away with a 
negative  belief  system  even  once.  Every  time  the 
thought, "I'm allergic" comes up, it has to be instantly 
challenged  and  cancelled.  One  powerful  thought,  as 
you  can  see, is  sufftcient  to  create  it  on the  physical 
plane,  so  we  cannot  be  sloppy  about  this  work. We 
have to watch it carefully within ourself. 

There is  really no order of difftculty in the healing 
of these  various  illnesses. This  means  that  what  the 
world considers to be a severe disease is just as easy to 
let go of as a minor illness. 

Among friends, co-workers, acquaintances, patients, 
and other people I have worked with, there is a group 
of people  who  have  recovered  from  many serious 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

67 

illnesses totally and completely.They were given up as 
hopeless,  as  almost  dead,  and  yet  those  people  who 
have become my friends  are extremely alive  and well, 
with no traces of their illnesses at all. It does not make 
any difference  because the truth is  the truth, and that 
which is false  is  false. It does not depend on the form 
of falsehood; all that is false is false, just as all that is true 
is  true. If your mind can create it, then your mind can 
cancel  it. We  thereby  begin  to  use  the  power of the 
mind on our own behalf. 

The process of self-healing is  handled on the level 

of the specific by letting go of our resistance to experi­
encing  it  and  then  canceling  the  thought  forms. The 
healing is going on in general, more powerful ways due 
to our willingness to let go of all  criticism and attack, 
along with beginning to love the humanness in ourself 
and others, and the  reawakening  of our awareness  of 
its innocence. 

What about the third level, that of traditional med­
ical  treatment? What  part does  it  play in this  kind  of 
self-healing?  Traditional  medical  treatments  now  sur­
prisingly  become  very  effective. As  we  let  go  of our 
guiltiness, which came about through our lack of com­
passion for our own humanness, medical measures that 
were once fruitless now begin to be effective. In other 
words, during  all  the illnesses  I  had, such as  migraine 
headaches,  ulcers,  and  diverticulitis,  I  received  tradi­
tional  medical  treatment  for  twenty years  or more.  I 
was  on  the  diets,  medications,  antispasmodics,  and  . 
antacids, and I did all the traditional medical things, but 
they  were  not  working; however,  they  perhaps  kept 
things from  getting worse. After all, I  did not have  my 

68 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

stomach  or  colon  removed,  so  the  treatments  were 
working, but they were working  against  all  the  nega­
tive programming going on within the mind. 

When  we  start  to  let  go  of all  the  negative  pro­
grams, all  the previously relatively ineffective  medical 
treatments now become effective. In my case, the anti­
spasmodic that once barely kept the symptoms under 
control then totally  relieved  the  symptoms. A healing 
came  about. The  antispasmodic, the  antacids, and  the 
diet  that  was  considered  necessary  (in  addition  to 
acupuncture treatments) then brought about a healing 
of the  ulcer;  the  medications  were  very  powerfully 
effective. The  medications  for  relieving  the  allergies 
then worked wondrously well. We found that the need 
for the medication dwindled off.The need for all these 
ameliorative  measures  finally  disappeared,  and  I 
resumed eating  a  normal diet. You  might imagine  the 
kind of diet I had had to live on, with an elevated cho­
lesterol  level,  hypoglycemia,  diverticulitis,  an  active 
ulcer, migraine, and most of all, the allergies. 

I  remember walking  into  a  restaurant  and looking 
at .the  menu. The  only thing I  could eat was the  salad 
and the spinach because the seeds in the other foods 
would aggravate the diverticulitis, and the acids would 
aggravate  the  ulcer.  I  could  not  eat  tomatoes  or any­
thing of that nature, and of course, nothing containing 
sugar. I could not eat pasta,  any of the bakery offerings, 
the desserts, or the meats; I had to avoid them because 
of the elevated  uric  acid levels  of gout. Frankly, there 
were very few things left on this planet for me to eat. 
As  those  things  relieved  themselves,  however,  I 
then found that diet was also a belief system.That is the 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

69 

downside of holistic health-the belief system that all 
these things are injurious to us.They are injurious to us 
because we are holding in mind that they are. No such 
thing exists in the world of the 'real' .As a result, I am 
not  on  a  low-sugar,  low-cholesterol,  low-fat  diet.  My 
cholesterol and blood sugar are normal. I am on a reg­
ular  diet and  never get a  gout attack. All  those things 
turned out to be corollary to the belief systems. 

If we have a  belief system about gout, then we will 
have all that goes with it, including the beliefs about the 
various meats that supposedly bring it on, such as pick­
led herring, which I love  (and now eat almost  daily). I 
used to  have  gout so  severely that if I  ate  just a  small 
amount of liver pate on a  cracker, it would bring on a 
gout attack. 

I  always  tell  the story of how one day  I  cooked a 

,  frying  pan full  of liver and kidneys for my kitty, think­

ing she would love them. Instead she stuck her nose up 
and would not eat them. There was a big pan of them, 
and they smelled delicious as  they were cooking with 
onions and a little bit of bacon. I even put a little catnip 
in some of it, but Kitty just was not interested. All  of a 
sudden, I saw that my whole dietary limitation was just 
a crazy belief system that I was holding in mind, and I 
said, "I  am an infInite being. I  am not subject to this. I 
mean this is absurd." So  I sat down and ate almost the 
whole pan of kidney and liver, and needless to say, I did 
not have a gout attack nor have I ever had one since. I 
just canceled it as a belief system. It was a joke-a sad 
joke, but still  a  joke. We  are  subject only to  what we 
hold in mind-consciously or unconsciously. 

When we re-own the source of our power and stop 

70 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

giving  it away to the world, we fmd that the cause of 
gout is  not in kidneys  and liver; it is  not in stress; it is 
not in uric  acid levels  or purine metabolism. It has to 
do with what we hold in mind. When we re-own and 
stop denying the power of our own mind, we begin to 
realize that we are the source of either health or illness. 
What do I mean when I say, "I  am the source?" I mean 
my consciousness, my infmite being. 

Let us now consider the energy fields  that explain 
how  this  works. What  are  the  intrinsic  physics,  the 
energy fields,  and  the  levels?  Instead  of owning  our­
selves at a level below the level ofTruth at 200 and put­
ting power that is a lie out into the world, we begin to 
re-own  the  truth  about  ourselves.  Our willingness  to 
look into this brings about the experience and realiza­
tion of the truth of it. That is the experiential purity of 
what we are discussing. We, ourselves, can reduplicate 
the truth of this through our own experimentation.We 
are our own individual self. 

As we re-own ourselves as the source and move up 
in the levels of consciousness, we begin to realize that 
we are  subject to anything that we hold in mind, and 
that the belief systems  and thought forms  we bought 
into have  been the source or 'cause' of what we have 
been experiencing. The world has no power to create 
any such thing. Does a piece of kidney have  power in 
it?  Of course not. Do our minds have the power to cre­
ate illnesses? Yes, indeed. 

Now we will  begin  to  undo  the  syndrome  of the 
'bubble' person. What happens to the bubble person? 
Its  innocent, childlike  mind  enthusiastically  buys  the 
whole idea of holistic health and nutrition, for example. 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

71 

It begins to read all the literature. Well, let me tell you 
that if we continue to read that literature long enough, 
we will fmd that everything in our world, everything in 
our  experience,  everything  in  our  environment,  and 
everything in this universe will kill us. That is the mes­
sage  we will get. Magnesium will kill us; calcium will 
kill us. The  energy given off by rugs, paint, and every­
thing  in  the  air will  kill us. If we  walk  by somebody 
who  is  smoking  a  cigarette-"Aha!  I'm  going  to  get 
lung cancer." We unWittingly buy into all  these power­
fully negative thought systems. However, we can begin 
to cancel them, one by one. I did it. 

I had a friend who said eggs would kill me. Goodbye, 
eggs.  Cholesterol  will  kill  me.  Good-bye,  cholesterol. 
Water will kill me; dairy products will kill me; meat will 
kill me.Well, eat fruit. Okay.And fruit is full of pesticides. 
Holy smokes! I was into fruit. Fruit did not last long at all 
because  the minute  I  got the  pesticide  story, goodbye, 
fruit. Then I went to vegetables. Oh, oh! Vegetables  are 
full of it, too.They spray all those fields in California, and 
fish contains mercury. What is left to eat? 

We  become  increasingly  paranoid.  We  do  not 
become increasingly healthy; we become increasingly 
paranoid,  and  all  my  'brown-bag'  friends  are  dead! 
Brown-bag  friends-those  are  people  who  used  to 
belong to  one  of the medical  societies  that really got 
going  on  this. A  brown-bag  person  is  one  who  has 
bought into so much of this in the world that now they 
can eat only one or two kinds of natural organic rice or 
grams. There  are  only a  few  things  left  on the  planet 
that they can safely eat, and they carry them around in 
a brown bag. 

72 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

A  bubble  person  goes  to  a  banquet  event  where 
everybody is  eating food full  of what he  considers  to 
be  nothing  but  poison. They  are  "killing  themselves 
with the steak and the pesticides on the peas, fruit, and 
lettuce." While, in his view, they are killing themselves, 
he eats out of his brown bag. He sits in the back corner 
at  a  table filled  with brown-bag people. (This  was  an 
actual scene at a big banquet.) He fasts a lot, does a lot 
of running and other 'healthy' things, and, of course, he 
is  dead now. Why is  he dead, this  man who ran every 
day and lived this health? He died because he became 
a  bubble person with the paranoid view of the world 
that began to close in on him. He could not breathe the 
air  with  trust.  He  could  not  even  enjoy  the  carpets 
because  they  were  'probably  giving  off something  to 
which  he  was  allergic,  such  as  fiber  particles  that 
caused him to  choke. Other things, such as  the fumes 
emanating from the paints or insulation, or smoke par­
ticles from a cigarette that were going to give him can­
cer, caused his life to become smaller and smaller. 

What happens  in this  type  of situation is  the pro­
gressive denial of the truth about ourselves, along with 
progressively  giving  away  the  power of our being  to 
the power of causality in the world, which is  actually 
powerless. This is  the reversal of truth. By progressive­
ly reversing the truth, we become increasingly vu1.nera­
ble and a victim. We  end up with the total paranoia of 
the bubble person with 'environmental allergies' who 
can live only within a protective bubble of purified air. 
All  this is going on in consciousness, in mind. It is 
not going on anywhere  in reality. It is by buying back 
the truth of the power of our own decision that we can 

ASSISTING  HEALING 

73 

cancel  the  whole  syndrome. We  are  not  subject  to 
'that'. We  are  infinite  beings  who  are  subject  only to 
what we hold in mind.We have the power of canceling 
the belief systems. We have the power to refuse to buy 
into the negativity of the collective belief systems and 
to say 'no' to them. 

We also have the power to say 'no' to belief systems 
that come from our family. Really major allergies ran in 
my  family.  My  grandmother  was  allergic,  as  were  my 
mother and sister. Everybody had hay fever and sensi­
tivity  to  ragweed,  dust,  hay,  and  horses. As  a  conse­
quence, I had all  of those  allergies  also, with swollen, 
itchy eyes, and all the rest of the symptoms.We all lived 
on antihistamines. In addition, I was severely allergic to 
poison ivy and ended up in the hospital with general­
ized severe poison ivy dermatitis. It did not respond to 
any treatment except for a brown salve obtained from 
a  Native  American  medicine.  woman  from  the 
Wisconsin Dells tribe. 

Years  later,  I  participated  in A  Course  in  Miracles 
and was surprised to discover I no longer got migraine 
headaches from pesticides. I walked right into a house 
that had just been sprayed, and all of a sudden, I 'knew' 
I was no longer subject to belief systems. 

After this amazing discovery, I awoke one day to the 
realization  that I was  no longer subject to poison ivy, 
either, so I went outside, picked some, planted some in 
a  pottery jar,  and  played with it. It  was  miraculous!  I 
carried  it  around  to  show  family  and  friends.  They 
thought  I  had  gone  'over the  edge', so  to  speak, but 
after that, my life  changed and the negative belief sys­
tems fell  away, one after the other. I subsequently also 

74 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

let  go  of the  excess  weight  (fIfty  pounds)  and  felt  a 
greater safety overall about physical life. To  realize that 
we have power over our own lives brings a reduction 
in  overall  anxiety  and  a  renewed  sense  of well-being 
and aliveness. 

All  illness  is  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual,  and 
therefore  it  is  best  to  utilize  all  modalities  to  assist 
recovery. There  are  also  unknown  factors  that  influ­
ence recovery, such as  karmic proclivities. Thus, some 
illnesses  may persist, awaiting further inner discovery 
or the  evolution of one's personal level  of conscious­
ness  whereby  the  source  of  the  illness  is  revealed. 
Therefore, spiritual work  should  proceed for its  own 
sake and recovery surrendered to God. Successful treat­
ment is  one thing; healing is  of a  different dimension 
because  the  vast  sources  have  been  discovered  and 
brought to light. 

How  can  one  know if humility  and  surrender are 
complete? They are  complete when one is  indifferent 
to whether a healing occurs or not.That is the result of 
surrender to God at great depth and relinquishment of 
the desire to control or change the way things are. 

Practicality: Caveat 

It  is  always  adVisable  to  have  medical  diagnoses 
conftrmed  by  a  second  opinion.  Major  errors  are  not 
uncommon, and I myself had several major misdiagnoses 
that were potentially fatal  if not detected. The cause of 
severe  heart  failure  as  being  due  to  Graves  disease 
(hyperthyroidism)  was  totally  misdiagnosed  earlier. 
Prostatic obstruction did not require surgery but instead 
merely cessation of the use of nasal decongestants. 

CHAPTER  3 

Stress 

Having been a physician and psychiatrist for over fifty 
years,  I  have  worked  in  the  fields  of psychoanalysis, 
psychotherapy, group therapy; and the psychodynamics 
of the various schools. In addition, there were years of 
research in the field of nutrition and its relationship to 
brain  chemistry,  mental  illness,  and  emotions,  which 
resulted  in the  textbook, Orthomolecular Psychiatry 
(co-authored  by Nobel  Prize  winner Linus  Pauling). I 
have  also  extensively researched and used alternative 
healing modalities that were found to be beneficial. 

For  the  last  thirty-five  years,  I  have  been  doing 
research into the nature of consciousness itself and the 
application of that knowledge to an understanding of 
spirituality. Inherent in this is the relationship between 
body,  mind,  and  spirit  and what  that  really  means. Is 
that something scientific  that we can clinically verify, 
or is that some kind of fantasy? 

There is  a  lot of emphasis today on the subject of 
stress and its prevention, along with its implications for 
physical, emotional, and psychological health and how 
it impacts industry and the business world. There is a 
greater awareness of stress in our culture and what this 
disQrder  implies. We  are  going  to  look  closely  at  the 
relationships  between  the  body  and  its  response  to 
stress, and the mind and how it relates to spirit. 

Stress results from a pOint of view-from what we 
hold  in  mind-and  from  our  attitudes  and  beliefs. 
Emotional stress originates primarily from within our­
selves  and  not  just from  the  world. There  is  no  such 

75 

76 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

thing as escaping stress because its source is within us 
and  not  located  within  the  world  as  commonly 
believed. Thus, we will be reversing the way the mind 
usually  looks  at cause  and effect. By  observation, one 
can see that 'cause' is not in the world nor is 'effect' in 
the mind, but vice versa.The level of power, the level of 
'cause', is  held  in  mind,  bringing  about  one's  experi­
ence of what happens in the world. Our folklore  intu­
itively knows  this  because  it  says, "One man's meat is 
another  man's  poison."  That  quotation  contains  the 
secret of what we are talking about. The power is  not 
in the event or in something 'out there'. The power of 
creating our experience of all events in life lies within 
each of us. Thus, it is by re-owning our power that we 
can learn how to prevent stress. 

There  are  methods  of precluding  stress  instead of 
treating  its  aftermath.  The  so-called  stress-reduction 
programs  that  are  commonly  available  in  our society 
today  are  really  methods  of  handling  the  effects  of 
stress once it has already occurred, such as in relaxation 
programs  designed  to  relieve  the  tension  within  the 
body. One might say that the horse is already out of the 
bam. There are ways to offset this  so that the tension 
never arises in the body and thus precludes the neces­
Sity of the various ways of handling stress based on the 
medical model. 

Some  time  ago,  I  received  a  brochure  entitled 
"Stress  and Heart Disease," which presented an entire 
belief  program.  The  article  promoted  the  idea  that 
stress  is  something 'out  there',  that  it  is  really  some­
thing that is inherent in life, and that the result of stress 
is going to affect the heart, with all its symbolic mean­

STRESS 

77 

ing  to  us. The  various  articles  in  the  pamphlet  dealt 
with heart disease and the consequences of stress com­
ing  about  through  our  physiology  and  manifesting 
within  the  body.  Because  all  things  are  experienced 
within consciousness, it is essential to look again at the . 
relationship between body, mind, and spirit. 

We  are  going  to  discuss  things  that we  can verify 
through  our  own  experience,  along  with  verifiable 
clinical experience derived from the viewpoint of the 
clinical  scientist who believes  only what can be clini­
cally repeated and verified through inner experience. 
A characteristic of the body is that it is insentient, 
that is,  the  body has  no  capacity to  experience  itself. 
This means that the arm, in and of itself, cannot experi­
ence  its  own  existence  or 'armness'.  It  cannot  even 
experience that it 'is', much less where it is, how big it 
is, or what it is  doing. How do we know what is going 
on with the body? We know solely because of the senses. 
We  do not experience the body itself, but instead, the 
senses'report of the body.We also note that the senses 
themselves  have  no  capacity  to  experience  them­
selves.  For  instance,  in  the  ear,  the  vibrations  going 
through  the  auditory  nerve  and  stimulating  the  tym­
panic  membrane  have  no  way  to  experience  them­
selves as sound. 

Where does the experience of the body take place? 
It registers in the brain, but then awareness  occurs in 
something greater than the brain itself, in what we call 
'mind' .It is because of the energy field of the mind that 
we experience the brain and the body, Mind itself, very 
curiously, also  lacks  the  capacity to  experience  itself. 
This is an amazing thought until we look into it.We see 

78 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that a thought, of and by itself, has no capacity to expe­
rience its own 'thoughtness' .A memory has no capacity 
in  and  of itself to  experience  its  own 'memoryness'. 
Similarly, a fantasy about the future has no such capac­
ity either. The imagination, the emotions-all that goes 
on  in  mind-are  only  experienced  because  of  that 
greater and larger  energy field  than mind  called  con­
sciousness. It is  an  energy  field  that  is  more  diffuse, 
formless, and capable  of experiencing  change  as  well 
as any phenomena. It is only because of consciousness 
itself that we  are  aware  of what is  going  on in mind, 
and it is because of mind that we are aware of what is 
going on with sensations. Because of sensations, we are 
aware of what is going on with the physical body. 

Curiously, however, even  consciousness  itself can­
not report what is  going on within itself except for  a 
greater  field  that  is  infmite  and  without  dimension 
called  the  experiential  knowingness  of  subjective 
awareness. Because  of that quality of awareness that 
accompanies  existence  and  beingness, we  are  capa­
ble  of awareness. Out of awareness  comes the know­
ingness  of  what  goes  on  within  consciousness. 
Consciousness  reports what is  going on within mind, 
and mind reports what goes on with sensations about 
the  body. Thus, we  can  see  that  what  we  are,  in  its 
highest  and greatest  sense, refers  to  the  capacity for 
subjective awareness. 

It is solely within consciousness itself that all expe­
rience  is  being  experienced.  Therefore,  to  directly 
address the source and place of experiencing will lead 
to the capabilities of precluding the sources of stress. 

As  described 

in  Chapter  1, 

the  Map  of 

STRESS 

79 

Consciousness is  a  numerical model based on energy 
fields and levels of consciousness.The energy fields are 
calibrated as  to their relative power, labeled according 
to  common  human  experience,  and  thereby  readily 
and easily understood.At the very bottom of the chart, 
for example, is 'Guilt', which, in its form of self-hatred, 
is a destructive, negative emotion. From the position of 
Guilt,  the  world  is  seen  as  a  place  of  suffering. 
Guiltiness  has  an energy field  of 30. The lower  states 
are close to Death, which calibrates at zero.With Death 
at  zero,  achieving  a  consciousness  high  enough  to 
become enlightened calibrates at 600 and over. 

Guilt, apathy, grief, fear,  desire, anger, and pride are 

all negative energy fields  that have adverse or destruc­
tive  effects  and therefore have  a  low calibration num­
ber.  For  instance, Apathy  at  50  has  much less  energy 
than Fear, which calibrates at 100. Fear at 100 has much 
less  energy than  that  of Courage, which  calibrates  at 
200. Desire at 125 has less energy than the state called 
Neutral (at 250), or being detached. 

Calibration of the energy fields can be replicated by 
using very common techniques, such as simple muscle 
testing, that verify the relative  energies and directions 
of the  fields. These  fields  calibrate  lower  when  one 
holds in mind a thought that is  angry, a thought about 
something  one  regrets  or  is  sad  about,  or  a  thought 
about something one fears. When the  arm of the per­
son  having  such  a  thought  is  tested,  it  will  instantly 
become  weak.  The  cerebral  hemispheres  become 
desynchronized, the  acupuncture  energy system goes 
out of alignment, and the person instantly loses power 
and energy. 

80 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

At  the  level  of Courage,  where  truth  is  told,  the 
energy field  moves upwards  to  that which is  positive 
and  supports  and  reinforces  life.  It  is  the  energy  of 
aliveness and is  aligned with integrity and honesty. 

When we  calibrate  the  great  teachers  of wisdom 
who have walked this  earth, we find  that they are at 
the level of 600 and above.The great avatars, the great 
saviors  of mankind, and the  great  mystics  and  saints 
are in the energy fields  of the 700s on up to  1,000. It 
could be said that truth begins at energy field 200 and 
expands  upward  into  an  ever-increasing  lovingness 
and alignment with Truth. Interestingly, health follows 
the same pattern. 

The  farther  up  we  go  in  our  energy  fields,  the 

healthier our bodies automatically become until, final­
ly,  there is joy in the aliveness and exquisite pleasure 
of  the  body.  At  level  540,  the  energy  field  of 
Unconditional  Love  and  healing, the  body  begins  to 
heal its own diseases, depending on inherent propen­
sities  as  well as  limitations (e.g., karma, both individ­
ual and human). 

In relation to stress, it is essential to look at the pre­
existing  conditions  within  a  person's  consciousness 
that set them up to experience life in a stressful way. It 
is  obvious  that  a  person who  has  identified with  the 
attitudes  of a  lower energy field  experiences  a  world 
that is  perceived as  negative. A person who  identifies 
with  the  lower  energy  field  of  hopelessness  and 
despair is  going  to  experience  the world as  hopeless, 
and all of life's experiences are going to be colored by 
that expectation. 

At  the level of Grief, people are full  of regret, con­

STRESS 

81 

cerned with loss in the past, and see this as a sad world. 
If there were a  God, he would be a  God who doesn't 
love us, doesn't care for us, and ignores us. 

In the energy field of Fear, there is the appearance 
of a suppressed energy that has been held throughout 
life  as  fearfulness. There  is  preoccupation with anxi­
ety and  constant worry  about  the  future. The  world 
looks  like  a  frightening  place,  and  a  person  at  that 
level experiences everything in the form of fright. The 
God of such a world would be considered to be fear­
some (punitive). 

The  person  who  is  always  desirous  and  wanting 
experiences  this  as  a  frustrating  world. The  angry 
person  is  prone  to  conflict  and  war. The  prideful 
person is vulnerable to perceived challenges and there­
fore  assumes  a  defensive  posture. We  will  discuss  the 
Map  of Consciousness  in  greater detail  to  learn  how 
we are automatically set up for stress. 

One  begins  to  suspect  from  the  statement  "One 
man's  meat is  another man's  poison" that the  set-up 
for  stress comes from one's own inner values, belief 
systems, and positions about life. These stem from  the 
programs  that  are  being  held  operative  within  one's 
consciousness.  One  starts  to  look  for  the  source  of 
stress not in the world, but in what is being held in con­
sciousness  that  assigns  stress  to  the  experience  of a 
given event. Following are some examples, available to 
all  of us, that  show how some  attitudes  and ways  of 
being with life set us up for the experience of stress. 

There was an elderly lady, for instance, who used to 
visit her married daughter who lived in the middle of 
one hundred acres of woods out in the country, thirty 

82 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

miles from  New York  City. There  was  only stillness; in 
fact,  the  only  sounds  that  one  could  hear  were  the 
rustling of the leaves and the songs of the birds. 

The  older woman had lived  all  of her life  in  New 
York City, on the lower East Side. She hated to make the 
visit to the country, and when she did, stayed as briefly 
as possible. Two or three days were all  that she could 
stand. The peace  and  silence  would  drive  her 'crazy', 
and she could not wait to return to the city where she 
would sigh with relief. Her apartment faced the street, 
and from her open window, she could talk to anybody, 
hear the hustle and bustle of the city, and feel secure­
all  in  the  midst  of the  lower  East  side  (her 'mother­
land'), despite all the noise and muggings. She was in a 
situation that another person might consider stressful. 
A lot of people might consider that part of the city 

scary  indeed.  What  she  experienced  as  security­
being there in the throngs of people, with the sounds 
of garbage cans and garbage trucks making a racket at 
5  AM,  was  reassuring  to  her.  In  contrast,  peace  and 
silence in the middle of one hundred acres of woods 
were stressful. 

We  can  look  at  a  comparable  example  of Devil's 

Island,  the  French  penal  colony. The  French  govern­
ment, out of social protest, closed much of the prison 
and allowed the prisoners  to run loose  on the island. 
They released them from the animal and torture cages 
and allowed them the freedom of the island and to walk 
around at will. What did the prisoners do?  Much to the 
surprise  of  the  authorities,  they  went  back  to  their 
cages to sleep at night. They felt frightened, lonely, and 
insecure even though, for the fIrst time in all the years, 

STRESS 

83 

they had the freedom they so vociferously had demanded 
and  died  for  during  that  time. The  sense  of security 
came from the feeling of being back in the cages. 

To  most people, a  jail cell would be the maximum 
threat. No greater horror could be imagined. Yet, what 
have  other people  done  in  a  prison  cell? They  have 
written prize-winning novels and staggering pieces of 
literature. Things written in jail cells and prisons have 
changed the course of the history of mankind, for bet­
ter or worse. Adolf Hitler wrote Mein Kampfwhile in 
prison. 

Another interesting example, in contrast to Devil's 
Island,  is  exemplified  by  the  famous  movie,  Lost 
Horizon.  If  you  remember,  in  that  movie  Ronald 
Coleman and the other passengers of a plane made an 
emergency  landing  in  the  Himalayas.  They  went 
through a  pass  and came upon Shangri-La, which rep­
resents  an almost  heavenly condition. Its  energy field 
(540-600) is  very high and is a place of unconditional 
love  and  unending  peace.  Although  the  character 
played  by  Coleman  was  ready  for  the  experience, 
benefiting  greatly  and  expanding  his  own  conscious­
ness,  the  other passengers  reacted  to  it  differently.  It 
was interesting to watch six different people with six 
different  reactions. A  couple  of them  were  not  quite 
ready for  the  experience  and reacted  to  it as  a  stress 
due to its newness  and strangeness. Others felt  stress 
for  a  while  but then adjusted  to  it  and  accepted  the 
sort  of heavenly  condition  in  their  lives.  In  contrast, 
others were acutely disturbed by it. 

The  person  playing  Ronald  Coleman's  brother  in 
the  movie  became  agitated  and  almost  paranoid.  He 

84 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

demanded  to  return  to  the  'real  world'. All  these 
people exhibited a  reaction not to where  they were 
but  to  their  individual  positions. Their experiencing 
was not about the environment but about their own 
levels of consciousness. 

One  time  I  was  leaving  Ecuador  and  at the  time, 
there  were  only  two  planes  a  week  that  flew  out  of 
Quito.  I  arrived  for  the Thursday  flight,  having  made 
reservations  many  months  in  advance,  but  when  I 
checked in, the ftrst thing I was told was that my name 
was not on the list. Then I was told that the plane was 
not leaving on Thursday of that week; it was leaving on 
Saturday. For some reason, it just seemed to be humor­
ous and even hilarious. Somehow, being in the culture 
of Ecuador at an altitude of 10,000 feet and above, the 
fact  that the  plane was going to leave  three days  late 
was viewed as not really important. Nobody got upset 
about it, and interestingly, the clock in the airport that 
hung from the middle of the ceiling had stopped work­
ing many years previously, and nobody had bothered to 
ftx it. 

There was no frustration  in coming from  the  atti­
tude of acceptance, so there was no stress. There was 
an easygoing social attitude in which precision in the 
material  world  was  not  considered  to  be  important. 
Human values were of greater importance. In this case, 
because of human value, even the convenience of the 
crew was more important than the departure day, and 
nobody seemed to mind. The setting, the expectation, 
and the cultural attitude in Quito were not even expe­
rienced as stressful. If that had happened in a different 
social  setting, such as  LaGuardia Airport, for  example, 

STRESS 

·85 

and the Thursday flight was not leaving until Saturday, 
it would have been experienced as  stressful. 

As  a matter of fact, when I arrived for the Saturday 
departure scheduled at 11:45AM, there was some kind 
of delay. It was the only plane on the runway and the 
plane  just  sat  there.  Suddenly  it  was  noon,  the  time 
when everything shuts  down for  a  siesta, so  not only 
did  the Thursday  plane  not  leave  until  Saturday,  it 
didn't leave  at  11 :45 AM;  instead, it left  at  3  PM. The 
plane  just sat on the  runway while  everybody took a 
siesta.  When  it  was  over,  everyone  gathered  their 
belongings, got  on the  plane, and  away  we went. No 
one  was  upset;  everyone  was  totally  relaxed  and  at 
ease. So it really is possible to be at peace with a three­
day delay in aflight schedule. 

Within these  experiences is  the key to the under­
standing of stress, because when we talk about stress, 
we are  really talking  about the  experience of what is 
stressful  within  our  own  consciousness. To  consider 
the  body as  part of a  stress  response  means  that the 
body is  only  responding  to  what is  held  in mind. By 
altering what we hold in mind-our expectations, our 
way of being with life-we can preclude the develop­
ment  of stress. We  did not have  to  go  to  a  relaxation 
program to handle the stress of the plane's being three 
days late. We  did not have to go to some kind of coro­
nary  exercise·  program  to  protect  our  hearts  from 
stress-there wasn't any stress. Consequently, the real 
approach to stress is to prevent it in the first place-to 
preclude it by understanding how and where it arises. 
Our ftrst  understanding is  that the  source of what 
we experience as  stress is within ourselves; it does not 

86 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

exist 'out there' in the world. It does not exist in plane 
schedules or prison cells; it exists only within our own 
consciousness. 

As  we examine the Map  of the fields  of conscious­
ness  more  closely,  our  awareness  of this  subject  will 
advance rather rapidly because it is easy to understand. 
It is something we already know; it is just necessary to 
bring it into our awareness. 

The  energy  fields  at  the  bottom  of the  Map  are 
adverse  or destructive to life  and can be called stress 
because  of  their  intrinsic  nature,  which  indicates  a 
stressful direction.When we move to Neutral, we go in 
a  positive  direction  to  that  which  is  not  stressful. At 
consciousness level  540, all  things  are  experienced in 
their beauty and perfection, in the oneness of life, and 
in unconditional love and lovingness. 

On the Map, to the right of these energy fields that 
are  calibrated  as  to  their  relative  power, we  see  the 
emotions  that  arise  from  those  positions  or ways  of 
being with life.  For example, we  can  see  that  people 
who are at the level of Guilt experience the emotions 
of  blame  and  self-hatred.  They  experience  life  as 
destructive  and  see  a  world  of suffering. The  person 
who  holds  the  position  of Apathy  about  life  experi­
ences  the  emotion  of hopelessness. They see  life  and 
their world as  hopeless. They are in despair, and there 
is a loss of energy. The God of such a world is dead. 

If enough  energy  is  poured  into  a  person  in  the 
state  of apathy, they can move  up to  Grief, a  stage  in 
which they can express  emotion. It has  a  certain bio­
logical purpose, and the expression of grief, such as the 
crying of a child, brings up the emotion.Those who are 

STRESS 

87 

in that energy field are looking to the past and see their 
lives filled with regret and 10ss.They become dispirited 
and experience this as a sad world, feeling that the God 
of this world is  ignoring them. In contrast, the person 
who is in the suppressed energy field  of Fear looks at 
life  with intense  worry  and  anxiety  and  experiences 
life  as  frightening.  Regret  stems  from  clinging  to  the 
past, and fear results from  living in the future. 

What is  life?  It includes a view of the world and a 
view of ourself and others, as  well as  expectations of 
Divinity. What is life, in and of itself?  Is  it arising out of 
the event? We  then see that these fields  of energy are 
really  portholes. They  are  ways  in which we  see  the 
world. It is the color of the glasses we put on. If we put 
on  gray  glasses  coming  from  Grief,  then  everything 
looks  sad. A  person  walking  down  the  street  who  is 
dOminated by this energy field  sees everything on the 
street as  hopeless. He  looks  at man  and man's  condi­
tion  or  opens  the  newspaper,  and  he  sees  hopeless­
ness;  man's  condition  is  hopeless. As  he  walks  down 
the  street, he  looks  at the  elderly people  or the  chil­
dren and sees how hopeless their condition is; they are 
going to have to grow up in a world of hopelessness. 

The person who is  sad walks down the street and 
literally experiences their perception of sadness.When 
they open the newspaper, they see all there is to be sad 
about in the world and the sadness of man's condition. 
They see the trash on the street.They look at the elderly 
people and think how sad aging is. They feel sorry for 
the  children and think how sad is  the world they are 
going to have to grow up in.They know the pain of life. 
They are holding so much pain that the pity expresses 

88 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

itself now-how sad for these children. 

Those  who  are  in  the  energy  field  of  Fear  see, 
experience, and create in their world the  conditions 
of that which is fearful. They read the newspaper and 
see how fearful this world is-killings, murders, mug­
gings, war, and bombings. They walk down the street 
and  see  everything  as  frightening.  They  see  the 
chances for accidents and how people can twist their 
ankles on the curb. They think there should be warn­
ing  signs  everywhere. The  people who  see  this  as  a 
frightening  world  put  double  locks  on  everything. 
They double lock their car within their own double­
locked  garages  within their own double-locked yard 
in an area that has never had a robbery. 

The fear comes from within and projects a frighten­
ing  appearance  out to  the world. If we  have  fear-col­
ored glasses, everything looks like fear, and if we search 
for God, we see a fearful God.The God of a frightening 
world is one to fear. 

A person may  move  into  a  higher energy field  of 
desiring this and wanting that, which occurs via social 
education. People  at  the  bottom of the  Map  who  are 
aligned with hopelessness, such as  those  in the Third 
World countries or segments of lower socioeconomic 
groups in our society, began to see what other people 
have  when  television  became  available. This  created 
desire, which is  felt  in the  emotional field  as  wanting 
and  craving  and  is  also  expressed  fully  in  the  addic­
tions.The process occurring in consciousness is that of 
entrapment.  Because  someone  wants  or  begins  to 
desire  something, they then experience  this  world as 
frustrating.The stress they experience is that of endless 

STRESS 

89 

frustration. 

Wantingness  can  result  in  a  person  who  is  never 
satisfied,  and  no  matter  what  they  get,  they  always 
want something more. If they do not experience fulfill­
ment of their wishes, this  brings up more wishes and 
results in an endless desire for control.They see this as 
a  very frustrating  world, and  as  they walk  down  the 
street, they see all the things they want-the cars, the 
appurtenances,  and  the  addresses. As  they  open  the 
newspaper, they see more things they want.They want 
to  change  the  world; they want  to  'get'. This  endless 
addiction  to  'gettingness'  creates  endless  stress  that 
comes from within the self.The problem is the endless 
desire for something. 

When people, out of their frustration, move  up to 
Anger, they then begin to experience an angry world. 
They are full  of resentment and are boiling over with 
hatred, blame, and  grievance. With  a  person like  this, 
the  suppressed  energy of anger is  now ready to  spill 
forth in any event. They see the world as competitive. 
Because of the angry glasses this person wears, when 
they  open  the  newspaper,  their  stomach  turns  with 
wrath, indignation, and anger over the  events that are 
reported. 

If they walk down the street, they see many things 
to  be  angry  about-the  condition  of the  street  signs 
and  the  street  in  general,  including  the  newspapers 
that  are  strewn  all  over.  Looking  at  children  and  old 
folks  makes  them  think  about  their  situations  and 
makes  them  angry. They  live  in  a  world  of injustice, 
indignation, and competition. If they own a used-car lot 
and someone down the street opens one, they look at 

90 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

it as  competition and think they are going to lose as  a 
result. Because  these  people live  in a  win-lose  world, 
their stomachs are always tense. They have not moved 
up to a  higher level of harmony and cooperation; as  a 
result, they don't realize that the more used-car lots on 
the street, the better business will be for everyone. 

To  a  person  at  the  level  of  anger,  the  world 
becomes a threatening place. The God of that kind of 
universe would be the God of war. Out of their anger, 
these  people with a  chip  on their shoulders  become 
war-like  and ready for  combat. Their anger is  ready to 
burst forth. The world is very stressful then because of 
the suppressed· anger. If someone were to bump their 
fender in a parking lot, up would come the anger, the 
cursing, and the threat of a lawsuit. They are preoccu­
pied with revenge and 'getting even' with enemies. 

If a person moves up to the level of Pride, there is 
more energy available, along with negative, destructive 
emotions. Although  pride  is  often thought  of as  con­
structive,  innately  it  is  actually  destructive  because 
pride is denial. Its expression is really one of arrogance 
and contempt because  the process  occurring  in con­
sciousness is that of inflation. 

Prideful people are then very polarized and defen­
sive in their positions and become like those who are 
angry. Their position is 'right', and they live in a world 
of right and wrong, of win or lose. Therefore, stress is 
always occurring within that person because they see 
all relationships, interactions, and transactions in terms 
of  win-lose,  which  is  about  the  importance  of  per­
ceived  status  and  has  to  do  with  ownership. When 
these persons read the newspaper, they are seeing the 

STRESS 

91 

status  of all  that is  involved, along with the status  of 
the people being written about. They walk down the 
street and primarily see symbols of status-the labels 
on  clothes  and  the  addresses. All  these  things  about 
life  now  become  status,  and  these  people  become 
interested in who others are from a status viewpoint. 
All these are obviously vulnerable positions of the 
victim mentality, because  all  the positions below the 
level of truth project the source of happiness as being 
outside  oneself. Holding to  these  positions results  in 
giving  one's  power  away.  Doing  so  says  that  the 
sources  of meaning, happiness, and  value  are  some­
thing outside oneself; they are somewhere 'out there'. 
These positions come from lack. "If it is out there, it is 
something  I  have  to get. If it is  something  I  have  to 
get, it means I lack it, or that something could stand in 
my way of getting it." 

To  live  in  that  kind  of world  is  to  always  live  in 
danger and under threat  because  something  outside 
of oneself can block the  attainment of something  or 
take  it  away.  It is  the  world  of victimhood  because 
people have given away their power to the world.. 

It is  often said that the sources  of happiness  and 
stress are 'out there', and thus the hope for releasing 
stress is by 'changing the world'. Stress does not exist 
in the world. Instead, it is an inner experience within 
consciousness  itself. There  really  is  no  way  one  can 
basically  change  the  world  to  relieve  stress. What, 
then, can be done? 

We  can begin to  own the  truth  about it  and have 
the courage to look at the facts. The minute we do this, 
we change the energy fields.As we move to Neutral, we 

92 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

move into a more positive space. Now there is the will­
ingness to face, cope, and handle the situation, thereby 
bringing re-empowerment. That means reclaiming our 
power and living closer to the truth. 

The  person who is  at  the  level  of Courage  sees a 
world  of challenge, growth,  and  opportunity. It is  an 
exciting, fun world, a  place wherein one is glad to be 
alive.That person opens the newspaper and sees all the 
tremendous  opportunities  for  mankind  to  move  into 
and solve  and resolve problems. One sees all  kinds  of 
problem-solving  techniques  in  their  own  mind  that 
they wish to try.The world then becomes exciting, one 
of opportunity and growth in which one begins to ask, 
"Where can I fit in? Where can I start expressing myself 
and  experiencing  some  of these  opportunities?" The 
kind of God one experiences in this world of opportu­
nity is a God of open-mindedness.The open mind now 
begins to change that which is stressful. What is stress­
ful at the level of Pride perhaps becomes an object of 
curiosity and an opportunity for growth to the person 
at the level of Courage. 

Moving up to the next level called Neutral, the energy 
field calibrates at 250 and has much more power than 
the positions below, and the power is now being used 
in a  constructive direction. It is as though at the lower 
levels, the antenna is first tuned to the negative; then it 
moves to neutral, and finally, to the positive. One then 
begins  to  experience  life  in  a  positive  direction 
because one is the experiencer. The experience is not 
out there; it is within one's own consciousness. If a per­
son is willing to let go of a lot of their positionalities, they 
no longer need to be defensive, which is a result of pride­

STRESS 

93 

fulness, importance, and the need to always be 'right'. 

The positions of the atheist, the bigot, or the zealot 
lead to conflict. These are based on the prideful belief 
that "my position is 'right'; therefore, your position  is 
'wrong'."  With  the  willingness  to  surrender  that,  the 
person becomes  somewhat unattached. People  begin 
to  transcend  their vulnerability to  the  world, and  the 
process occurring in consciousness releases them.The 
world begins to look okay, and the God of such a world 
is now the God of freedom. 

How is  that 'okayness' expressed? A person at  this 
level, when on the way to a  job interview, thinks, "If I 
get this job, it will be great, and if I do not, that is okay, 
too, because there are other job opportunities I would 
really like to look at." As a result, that person is not stuck 
because they have not based their survival on anyone 
particular thing. 

As  we move  into Willingness, we  add intention to 
the  process  of consciousness.  It means  a  'yesness', a 
joining, an alignment, and an agreement with life, and 
such a person begins to see the world as friendly. When 
these people at the level ofWillingness walk down the 
street, the God ofthat kind of world appears promising 
and hopeful. Now their experience  of the newspaper 
is  one of opening it up and seeing all the evidence of 
man's cooperation and struggle to solve his own prob­
lems. What another perceives as  destruction, they see 
as  merely the  process, or the working out, of the  bal­
ance of forces. When they walk down the street, they 
begin to see a friendlier world and now see people as 
friendly. Their perception has  changed; and  now 'old' 
people who no longer have to 'make it' in the world are 

94 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

frequently seen as more open to friendliness. It is  now 
simple to walk up to most older people and instantly 
strike up a conversation. 

Those at the level of Willingness no longer look at 
others with a  paranoid  distrust or size  up people to 
see where they stand in a prideful world. They begin 
to see strangers  and older people as  friendly,  as  well 
as  the friendliness  of young children, and find  that it 
is easy to strike up a relationship with them. 

As we move up into Acceptance, we then begin to 
accept that we are the source of our own experience 
of  life.  The  person  who  has  reached  this  level  of 
awareness has taken  back the power over their own 
life  and  realizes  that  no  matter where  they  are  put, 
they are going to somehow make do. If they were put 
on a  desert island, a year later, they would have  built 
a tree house and would be carving coconuts. 

If they were put in a  jail cell, they would write  a 
novel  or  maybe  even  sit  cross-legged  and  go  into 
meditation. Others often choose to become jailhouse 
lawyers and even get law degrees. The  power to cre­
ate the experience of life is within.These people have 
reclaimed their own power. Consequently, the God of 
that kind of world and universe of experience is  now 
perceived as promising, hopeful, and merciful, and as 
a  God no longer to be feared. These people now feel 
adequate and confident. 

Companies want to hire that kind of person to go 
out  after  the  big  contracts. That  person  is  able  to 
accept  the  ups  and  downs  in  the  realities  of life  as 
well as  their own limitations.A person dominated by 
pride is unable to accept limitation. When a company 

STRESS 

95 

says, "We would like you to go to Venezuela and close 
a  deal,"  the  person  at  the  level  of Acceptance  feels 
adequate and confident and can say, "You know, I really 
do not do very well with that company, and I  do not 
get along with that particular man. I would do  much 
better in Belgium. I can sell twice as much there.Why 
don't you let Jim go down to Venezuela?" 

There  is  the  willingness  to  accept how the world 
works and to avoid going into indignation. Even the IRS 
has its own way of being in the world. One avoids 'right 
and  wrong' and  just  accepts  that  is  how  it  is  in  this 
world and goes along with it. (Acceptance is  different 
from passivity.) The beginning of the transformation of 
consciousness is the realization that we are the source 
of our experiences, and therefore, the world begins to 
look more positive, harmonious, hopeful, and benign. 

Empowerment  moves  a  person  up  to  the  next 
energy field  of Love. What do we mean by love?  It is 
not the sentimental emotionalism that emanates from 
attachment  or what Hollywood depicts  as  love. That 
emotionalism coming out of a  possessive  ownership 
of the  other  person,  the  back-and-forth  control  and 
the  power struggles  that  occur, the words  of a  song 
that say, "If you leave me, I will kill myself" are not the 
elements  of Love. These  are  all  the  consequences  of 
an attachment rather than real love. 

Unconditional Love is  a way of being with life that 
nurtures, supports, and, of its own nature, is  forgiving. 
It  is  the  beginning  of the  revelation  of some  of the 
truths  of  life  because,  within  the  brain,  there  is  a 
release  of  endorphins.  (See  Brain  Function  and 
Physiology  chart in  Chapter  1.)  Endorphins  allow  a 

96 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

certain inner state to occur, a way of being with one's 
self and  one's  body  in  the  world.  Consequently,  the 
world  starts  to  appear to  be  lovable.  Such  a  person 
now walks down the street feeling somewhat mellow. 
They see the lovingness that really occurs underneath 
the  apparent  trivialities  of  life  and  holds  all  of 
mankind together. The person is moving into a higher 
energy field. 

To see life as harmonious and lOVing reduces stress, 
making  this  person  less  vulnerable  because  they  are 
aligned  with forgivingness. The  intention  of this  field 
that one chooses is  called lovingness, which is  experi­
enced as  being loving towards all  things at all times, as 
loving mankind and being nurturing towards one's self. 

There  is  a  difference  in  how  people  view  them­
selves in contrast to the harshness of the perfectionist 
who is always at the level of stress with human nature. 
The  person  who  is  unforgiving,  with  a  tendency  to 
judge  and  condemn, carries  self-hatred  and  guilt, and 
for that person to just breathe in and out causes a state 
of stress. If they get  up  late, they  already  hate  them­
selves for getting up late. The stress stems from perfec­
tionism,  inflexibility,  and  the  propensity  for  self-con­
demnation,  and  it  is  internally  generated. The  open­
minded persons who start to be easier with themselves 
also  start  to  be  accepting  of their  own  humanness. 
Forgiveness supports the mental attitude of the readi­
ness to allow for the humanness of others, which also 
allows for one's own humanness. 

With  progressive  inner spiritual  work,  one  moves 
up to an even higher energy field  of joyfulness, which 
approaches the beginning awareness of the reality that 

STRESS 

97 

one really is  the experiencer, not the experience. One 
is  then not at the effect of the world but instead real­
izes that one determines the way it is experienced. 

Out  of inner serenity  arises  compassion  for  all  of 
life. Awareness  of its  incredible  beauty and perfection 
increases,  along  with  experiencing  the  oneness  and 
unity  of it. Then  the  more  evolved  person  opens  the 
newspaper  and  sees  and  experiences  the  totality  of 
man's  lovingness.  Despite  the  limitations  of  human­
ness, that which is making all the articles appear in the 
newspaper is the expression of the onward movement 
and  evolution  of  man's  consciousness.  When  an 
evolved person walks down the same street, they expe­
rience only the incredible beauty of it, the beauty of life 
in all  its  magnificent expressions. One  can then see  a 
rose in the middle of its perfect unfoldingness.The less­
evolved  person  would  look  at  the  half-unfolded  rose 
and say,"I don't want that, that's an imperfect rose."The 
evolved person sees perfection in the evolution of life 
itself and sees that half-unfolded rose in the same way. 
They then simply project forward  in time and see the 
unfoldingness, the incredible  beauty, and its  precision 
and become aware of the inner sacredness of all life. 

As  we  talk  about  these  energy  fields  as  levels  of 
consciousness, it is  obvious  that they  determine  how 
we experience life.They determine what kind of a God 
we think exists in the universe as well as  the kinds of 
emotions we express.All of this expression is a process 
going  on  within  consciousness  itself.  It is  now  clear 
that there is  nothing 'out there' that has the power to 
create stress, and that we ourselves are the creators of 
stress by our positionalities and attitudes. 

98 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

It becomes obvious that the open-minded, easygo­
ing  person  does  not  experience  severe  stress when 
somebody backs into their car's fender in the parking 
lot.  What  happens  (as  you  may  have  experienced 
yourself)  depends  on  whether  you  are  in  a  'good 
mood' .What is stressful in one mood is  not stressful 
in  another. Often  the  person whose fender  was  just 
bumped is very upset.A peaceful person is concerned 
about  the  upset  person  and  tells  them, "You  know, 
there is  nothing to be upset about; it's only a  fender. 
We  both have insurance. It's no big deal. In reality; it's 
a  little nuisance in that you have  to take your car to 
the  body  shop  to  get  it  ftxed,  but  it's  really  no  big 
deal." The  evolved  person  desires  to  heal  the  upset 
that arose in the field of consciousness. 

It is not events that send one into self-pity or anger 
about an unjust world where people back into a fender. 
The wish to punch the guy in the nose arises from so 
much  anger  within  oneself.  The  detached  person 
would just handle the event with no particular feeling. 
One's  concern  about  the  feelings  of others  and  the 
desire to support life by relieving another's anxiety and 
fear arises from what one has become. It does not exist 
in  the  world.  The  dented  fender,  therefore,  has  no 
power over one's life. There is  no 'cause' of emotions 
except from within. To  see this fact results in empow­
erment,  autonomy,  and  release  from  the  illusion  of 
victimhood. 

Inner peace automatically arises out of our willing­
ness to give up certain positionalities, such as  judging 
others  and  making  them  'wrong'. Willingness  stems 
from a forgiving, understanding position.]udgmentalism 

STRESS 

99 

does not really solve anything but instead adds to the 
problem. Making  others wrong  results  in  a  world of 
lose-lose. This is a world where we lose and the com­
pany  loses.  It  is  stressful  by  virtue  of the  superim­
posed context. It is  stressful in the very way that it is 
set up because even if we win, we still go through the 
anxiety of possibly losing, so that even in winning, we 
do not really win. 

We know about people, for example, who say that 
they want  to  have  a  lot  of money. What happens  to 
them when they suddenly win a  lot of money?  Some 
interesting  research  has  been  done  on  people  who 
have  won millions  of dollars  in  the  big  lotteries. In 
follow-up studies of lottery winners, it was found that 
within  five  years,  the  degree  of  happiness  of  the 
people in this group was dismal. The rates of suicide, 
divorce,  sickness,  and  drug  addiction  had  risen 
spectacularly  among  these  people  who  ostensibly 
had  gotten  the  very  thing  they  had  wanted. The 
reason they played the lottery was to win. 

In  the  win-lose  game,  to  win, in  itself,  means  to 
defeat  others  who  lose. To  defeat  others  brings  up 
guilt.As a result, one cannot even be happy in winning 
because in a win-lose context, one wins and others are 
defeated, which results  in  guilt. In  competition, there 
are  unconscious fears,  for  example, fear  of the  oppo­
nent. There  is  the  fear  that the  sudden acquisition  of 
money may  mean that friends  will  be  out  to  get  the 
money.  This  can  result  in  reactions  leading  to  a 
depressed,  paranoid  attitude. At  the  lowest  level  of 
consciousness,  everyone  loses  because  it  is  a  hope­
less, dismal world. Stress automatically comes out of a 

100 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

win-lose position. 

Positions of great success and power in the world 
automatically  come  to  those  who  think  in  terms  of 
win-win because they set up within their own minds a 
way of being in the world and a way for others to be in 
their life that is mutually beneficiaLWhat kind of stress 
does the person experience who sets up everything as 
win-win? That  person wins  if a  friend  comes  over to 
their house, and they win if the friend does not. If they 
visit, what is held in mind is how much one is going to 
enjoy their friendship and presence.At the same time, 
one  knows  that if their friend  cannot make  it, that  is 
okay, too.As a result, the other person wins either way, 
also.  If they  come  over  for  dinner,  we  are  delighted 
with their presence. If they do not come for dinner, we 
have given them the free time to do something that we 
know will enhance their life. 

To hold all of our expectations in business as a win­
win situation results in success, which we experience 
as an enhancement of life. The better a company does, 
the  better  the  employees  do. The  more  a  company 
does,  the  more  it  gives to  the  world. The  better  the 
product  available  to  the  world,  the  better the  world 
supports the company. The more it supports the com­
pany, the more the company can support the economy. 
The more the employees are supported, the more they 
can support their families. The more the company sup­
ports  the  families,  the  more  the  families  support  the 
company. 

The way to become a success is to make our boss a 
success.  Instead  of going  into  competition  with  him 
(meaning  someone  has  to  lose),  making  our boss  a 

STRESS 

101 

success moves him up the ladder and creates space for 
us to move up as well.When coming from a competitive 
position with the intent to defeat the boss, there arises 
unconscious  anxiety,  distress,  and  the  fear  of retalia­
tion. 

The willingness  to  surrender the  adversarial  posi­
tion  and  become  more  easygoing  lessens  the  experi­
ence  of  stress. The  easygoing  person  at  the  level  of 
Acceptance  is  able  to  accept  human  nature  and  the 
world as  they are and is ready for any alternatives that 
arise. 

A  lot ·of  people  go  into  a  state  of  fear  at  the 
prospect of being visited by the IRS. They assume an 
adversarial position that brings up all kinds of stress. 
As stated previously, stress does not exist in the outer 
world but only in our attitude about it. One year, the 
computer selected me for  an audit. "Well," I  thought, 
"here's  a  chance  to  find  out  how  well  I  have  been 
doing."  I  sort  of  looked  at  the  prospect  happily.  I 
thought, "Here's  a  chance  to  fmd  out  if I  am  doing 
things correctly, and if not, what I can do about it." 

I spent a couple of weeks preparing for the audit. 
I  purchased  fancy  notebooks,  inserted  the  specific 
pages  into  celluloid  sheets  that  the  accountant  said 
the  IRS  would  be  interested  in,  and  labeled  every­
thing. When the agent arrived, coffee was ready, and I 
treated him like an honored guest. I escorted him into 
the  library,  gave  him  the  best  desk,  the  best  coffee, 
and the  best cup  and  saucer, not for  the purpose  of 
'buttering him up', but out of respect for his position 
because I could see how painful it must be to be a tax 
auditor. 

102 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

My  heart went out to this guy, and I  really wanted 
his day to be a good day. He was actually very pleased, 
and  as  the  day  went  on, I  had  my way  of looking  at 
things, and he had his way of looking at things.We had 
a friendly conversation and did a  sort of swap. He had 
a great day. By making his day a great day, I also had an 
enjoyable day. He said, "You know, I really hate to leave 
at three o'clock in the afternoon, but frankly, we are all 
done."The IRS people are really very friendly, very help­
ful, and very positive in their attitudes because that is 
how it is being held in consciousness. 

To  become easygoing is to get out of the habit of 
seeing  danger. The  easygoing  person  who  is  really 
confident  and  adequate  is  able  to  accept the  down­
side  of or the  possibility  of the  downside  of human 
nature  and  therefore  does  not  have  to  deny  it.  It  is 
preparing for the 'what ifs' in life, creating an oppor­
tunity to handle the other side and the opportunities 
that may arise.An easy way to discover the source of 
stress  is  to take  a  book along when driving to work 
through heavy traffic. This  converts the delays  into a 
pleasant  and  welcome  opportunity.  There  is  the 
capacity within us to create an enjoyable experience 
when waiting in traffic because there is time to read, 
catch up on things, and really enjoy life. 

What  does  it  mean when  we  go  into  a  neighbor­
hood and see a  zoning sign  that says, "No  children or 
pets"?  It means that people who live  in the neighbor­
hood have the idea that children and pets are stressful. 
There are  other people who would consider the lack 
of children or pets  to  be  stressful. Some  people  have 
the television on, the radio playing, and the lights  on; 

S TRES S 

103 

there is  a  lot of action in their lives. To  other people, 
that would be very stressful. Some people like silence 
and never turn on the television or radio  because the 
constant 'noise' in the background interferes with their 
concentration. 

Stress can also  arise from that which is  unexpect­
ed.The open-minded person sees many alternatives of 
what  could  happen  in  a  situation  and  plans  in 
advance  how  to  handle  the  unexpected  before  it 
occurs. If one considers the downside of a situation in 
advance,  for  example,  "What  if  the  contract  falls 
through," or "What if the person I  am to meet on the 
street corner doesn't show up," and plans an alterna­
tive  action if the  unexpected does occur, then stress 
is minimized or does not occur at all. 

The "Law of Initial Value" states that the effect one 
sees is not in the stimulus but has to do with the set-up 
of  the  organism,  the  preexisting  condition.  The 
response is not on just the intensity of the stimulus but 
on the position of the organism with which it is inter­
acting.  For  example,  in  pharmacology,  it  would  be 
senseless  to  ask what is  the  effect of twenty-five  mil­
ligrams  of  the  tranquilizer  Thorazene. The  effect  of 
twenty-five milligrams of Thorazene would depend on 
the preexisting condition of the patient. If the patient 
was  somewhat  dull  and  in  Apathy,  twenty-five  mil­
ligrams  of Thorazene  would  be very, very sedating. If 
the  patient was  in  a  highly  agitated  state, twenty-five 
milligrams  of Thorazene  might  have  no  effect.  If the 
person was  in a  state  of mild anxiety, twenty-five  mil­
ligrams  of Thorazene  might  be  quite  effective.  The 
patient's present condition, which includes the amount 

104 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

of suppressed energy they are holding, their attitudes, 
and  their belief systems, determines  the  effect  of the 
same stimulus. 

Some  people say loud music  drives  them crazy. In 
contrast,  consider  teenagers  who  put  on  earphones, 
turn the volume way up, and go into a state of delight. 
Is  loud  music  stressful  or not? The  basic  principle  is 
that we experience stress when we do not want a spe­
cific  stimulus  or situation. Consequently, when one is 
in  the  mood  for  loud  music,  it  is  pleasant  and  con­
tributes to the state of joy and aliveness. In contrast, if 
one  were  tired  or  exhausted  after  a  hard  day  at  the 
office, the same loud music would be experienced as 
stressful. Desire determines whether or not a stimulus 
is stressful. 

Stress  is  resisting what we  do  not want, and  not 
stressed is  getting what we do want. The problem is 
within ourself. The solution is  to merely shift our atti­
tude  by  choosing  lOVingness  towards  life,  which 
includes  an  energy field  called  humor  that  contains 
the capacity to laugh at ourselves and at the nature of 
life itself, and to love and laugh at the comedy of it all. 
That is the value of the great humorists who also tend 
to be long lived. 

Disturbed people  are  like  Don Quixote-fighting 
their own projections in the world. The comedy of it 
all is the basis of humor, laughing at those qualities of 
life,  holding  them  from  a  position  that  exposes  the 
paradox, because humor is in seeing the paradox. It is 
by inner decision whether life  is  experienced as  joy­
ful, harmonious, and easygoing, or experienced as  an 
enemy. We  begin  to  admire  instead  of envy  people 

STRESS 

105 

who are capable and easygoing, which means accept­
ance  and being  adequate. To  feel  adequate  and  solid 
results from realizing ourself as the source of how life 
is experienced. 

We can be the boss, and if the janitor does not show 
up, it  does  not  really  matter to  a  serious  degree. The 
truth  is  that  we  are  the  quality  which  experiences 
experience. within our own consciousness. Happiness 
results from the experience of our own existence and 
enjoying our own inner aliveness. 

When  we  stop  identifying  with  the  events  'out 
there' and giving them power over our lives, then we 
experience  an  inner  serenity  as  a  consequence  of 
having transcended the world. 

CHAPTER  4 

Health 

The  subject  of health  occupies  the  minds  of a  large 
part of the population. As  a physician, psychiatrist, and 
spiritual researcher, my interests have been focused on 
the area of health and self-healing. Importantly, in the 
relationship between body, mind, and spirit, it has been 
found that the body has no way of experiencing itself; 
the  body  is  experienced  in  mind  only.  The  body 
expresses that which is held in mind.The mind cannot 
experience itself, either; it has to be experienced from 
an even greater energy field, which is called conscious­
ness.A human being progresses from dense linear form 
to  an  ever-expanding  and  increasing  nonlinear Jorm~ 
lessness. One ends up with the experiencing of expe­
rience itself-that field called awareness. 

The relationship between body, mind, and spirit is 
very  important  when  considering  the  subject  of 
health.  Consciousness  itself  has  to  be  understood 
because all experiencing is going on solely within con­
sciousness.  It  has  been  discovered  that,  due  to  the 
power of the energy fields, healing  comes out of atti­
tudes  and  belief  systems  that  are  held  in  mind. 
Therefore, to a large degree, health is an expression of 
levels of consciousness. 

To  make  this  more  understandable  to  the  logical 
mind, the integrated Map of Consciousness is based on 
the  mathematical  relationship  between  the  energy 
fields that resulted from calibrating the energy fields of 
the  essence  of literally thousands  of things, including 
attitudes, feelings, perception, and beliefs. 

107 

108 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

From  this  model,  in  which  the  relative  power  of 
energy fields  is  calibrated, it  can be  seen that Apathy, 
which calibrates at 40, has much less power than that 
of Fear, which calibrates at 100. Fear, on the other hand, 
has much less power than that of Courage, which cali­
brates at 200. 

Not only do these energy fields  have  different lev­
els of power relative to each other, we can also see that 
the energy fields  go in a  certain direction. At the level 
of Courage, the  scale  progresse~  upward  beyond  the 
energy field  of 200  to  those  of Neutral, Willingness, 
Acceptance, and Love. These fields  give energy as well 
as  nurture  and support life  and truth, thus  increasing 
aliveness. At the bottom of the Map  of Consciousness 
(below 200) are the levels that do not represent truth 
in  the  human. Truth  really  begins  to  prevail  at  con­
sciousness level 200. 

If we  start at the bottom of the chart and move 
up to the level of 600, we leave the fields  of duality 
and illusion. We leave behind identification with the 
small self, or that which is called the ego, and move 
into  the  fields  of Enlightenment. The  energy  fields 
of the great enlightened beings-the great spiritual 
masters and avatars-start in the 600s and continue 
up to level  1,000. 

Health means aliveness, which is  an expression of 
an energy field. The body expresses  and is  subject to 
Wh~lt  is  held  in  mind,  and  therefore,  the  greater  the 
amount  of  negativity  held  in  mind,  the  greater  the 
effect of the negative energy field on the body's physi­
cal health. In contrast, the greater the positive energy 
that is  being held in mind, the more  powerfully posi­

HEALTH 

109 

tive is the energy field of life. This knowledge provides 
a  tool  to  determine  whether  or  not  something  sup­
ports health and the expression of life. 

At the bottom of the Map are the energy fields that 

contribute to illness, and above level  200 are the ener­
gy  fields  that  support life.  Each  of these  fields  corre­
lates  with an  emotion. That which  is  anti-life  has  the 
negative emotions of self-hatred, hopelessness, despair, 
regret, depression, worry,  anxiety,  cravingness, resent­
ment, hatred, and arrogance. These negative  emotions 
accompany  ill health. The  process  occurring  in  con­
sciousness  can  be  seen  arising  from  the  emotional 
states  of destruction, loss  of energy  and  spirit,  defla­
tion, entrapment, overexpansion, overinflation, and loss 
of power. 

Spiritually, the kind of world that a  person experi­
ences from  these  negative  mental states is  one  of sin 
and suffering, hopelessness, sadness, fright, frustration, 
competition, and status. They see the negative concep­
tualizations  of God  that  come  out  of a  lower  energy 
field.  God  can  be  denied,  or  conversely,  negatively 
depicted as the ultimate enemy of man-the God who 
is  punitive and even throws man into hell forever; the 
God  who  ignores  man  through  unlovingness;  or  the 
God who is  retaliatory. These depictions emerge from 
an energy field that has a negative direction along with 
a  negative  emotion  and  a  destructive  process  occur­
ring in consciousness. The negative views of God cor­
relate with lower levels  of consciousness (below cali­
bration level 200). 

Health  can  be  viewed  as  the  expression  of unop­
posed aliveness resulting from the removal of its obsta­

110 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

cles, including  all  that is  negative. Health results from 
transcending  limitations  and  feelings  of  separation. 
Since  we  have  the  power  of refusal,  we  can  refuse 
things in our life that are negative. 

If our mind  can  become  programmed  in  a  nega­
tive direction, we can choose to program it in a posi­
tive  direction as  well. Health is  an expression of self­
esteem. Just  how  does  one  learn  to  love  one's  real 
self?  How is  the body experienced, and how is  one's 
relationship  to  that  body?  There  is  a  sublime  state 
called 'nonexperiencing the body'in which the body 
is barely experienced as even existing. It is something 
one catches out of the corner of the eye and not cen­
tral to experiencing at all. It means letting go of iden­
tifying oneself as physicality. 

At the bottom of the Map of Consciousness, there is 
identification  of ourself as  being  the  body, but as  we 
move  up  higher  in  consciousness,  this  lessens  and 
lessens until identification with the body is transcended, 
and we move to the realization of the Self as spirit. 

It is necessary to look at the relationship between 
mind and body because of its great importance in the 
field of health and something that really is not clearly 
understood. A  basic  principle  that  is  demonstrated 
clinically is that we are subject only to what we hold 
in mind.This is a principle of healing and health, with 
two sides to the coin-one side being illness and the 
other being health. They are the opposite sides of the 
coin of the same understanding that heals and brings 
about health-that we are subject to what we hold in 
mind. 

A good clinical example is that of multiple person­

HEALTH 

111 

alities; another example is hypnosis. Under hypnosis, a 
suggestion can be given to a patient that they are aller­
gic to the roses on the desk, and that when they get up, 
they  will  get  hives,  a  rash,  and  start  sneezing. Then 
amnesia is created for the suggestion.When the person 
wakes up from the trance, all of a sudden, they start to 
wheeze,  get  hives,  and  develop  a  rash. The  body  is 
responding to what the mind believes. With hypnosis, 
the symptoms can be induced, along with most any ill­
ness,  by  convincing  the  patient  that  the  program  is 
true; and then amnesia can be created for memory of 
the  programming  process. This' illustrates  how  an  ill­
ness comes out of a program or belief system, which, 
in ordinary life, is often unconscious. 

In  the  laboratory,  this  occurs  as  a  psychological 
experiment. It is important to remember, however, that 
in everyday life, people have  been programmed (hyp­
notized) thousands of times. This occurs when sitting 
in a trance in front of a television.There is no conscious 
memory of the process; the program went in, and the 
person is now subject to it for the rest of their life. 

Because of childhood amnesia, many people cannot 
remember what happened to them before  the  age  of 
five years, and some people have very little or even no 
memory of anything from their entire childhood. Even 
in people with good memories of childhood, there are 
vast  areas  of vacant forgottenness.  In  those  areas  are 
the many programs that are now expressing in various 
forms of ill health, such as catch phrases like "Heart dis­
ease runs in our family." 

"Being overweight runs in the family;' "Allergies run 
in our family; or "Everybody in our family has hay fever." 

112 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

These thoughts become a  program that goes into the 
mind, and we can see that it is the same as  though the 
person were hypnotized. Until that program is brought 
to the conscious mind and cancelled, it remains opera­
tive within the unconscious mind (e.g., a chill or a draft 
causes colds). 

Another example of the power of mind over body 
is in the cases of so-called multiple personality. These 
have  been  gaining  increasing  attention  within  the 
field of psychiatry and are found to be far more com­
mon than was previously believed.The consciousness 
of one personality is adopted by the patient and oper­
ative  within that body for varying periods of time; it 
could  be minutes, hours, days, weeks, or even years. 
While that second personality is operative, the patient 
is subject to all the belief systems held by that person­
ality. If that personality happens  to  believe  it has  an 
ulcer, a weight problem, allergies, diverticulitis, colitis, 
back trouble-whatever it believes-while it is operative 
in the body, those physical abnormalities are  actually 
brought into existence. 

The reverse side of this occurs when that personal­
ity  leaves,  which  sometimes  comes  about  through 
intoxication  or  shifts  in  emotionality  or  life  circum­
stances, and then the other personality enters the body. 
Because the other personality has no such beliefs, the 
body promptly heals itself of all those illnesses. 

Why  does  the  mind  have  such  power  over  the 
body? We  will  consider  the  physics  involved, which 
will  make  it  easily  understood. The  energy  of  the 
physical  body  calibrates  at  about  200,  as  does  the 
earth itself. The  energy field  of the  mind  is  stronger 

HEALTH 

113 

and  often  calibrates  up  to  499. The  400s  are  in  the 
energy field  of the  intellect, reason, logic, mind, and 
what the mind believes.Therefore, if a thought is held 
in mind that says  strawberry seeds, caraway seeds, or 
any  kinds  of  seeds  give  me  diverticulitis,  then  the 
power of that thought coming out of the energy fields 
of perhaps  300  to  400  overpowers  the  body  at  the 
energy field  of 200. The body is  overpowered by the 
influence of the pattern of the belief. 

All thought has form, so the form in the personal or 
collective  unconscious,  or  in  the  collective  or social 
consciousness, is present in great detail. If we buy into 
a thought or go into agreement with it, the effect is to 
bring  it  into  our  own  consciousness,  which  then 
expresses itself within the body.The body will do what 
the  mind  believes. The  healing  of the  body  and  the 
achievement  of health  are  accomplished  not  just  by 
addressing the body directly, but also by addressing the 
.mind and moving into the field of consciousness. If the 
body is expressing that which is held in consciousness, 
then it is necessary to look at what that is. 

Often  we  are  not  aware  of what is  being  held  in 
consciousness, in which case it would be called 'being 
unconscious'. There  may  be  no  recall  of ever  having 
had· such a thought, but the body expresses what must 
be. It  is  like  an x-ray  telling  us  what  is  being  held  in 
mind since it is presenting itself in the body. For exam­
ple,  a  person  develops  clinical  diabetes  and  says, "I 
don't remember anything ever being said about that in 
my family. No one in my family has diabetes. I don't see 
where it could have arisen in my mind."We know that 
somewhere in the collective unconscious is  the belief 

114 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

of diabetes and all that goes with it. If we do individual 
research  with  the  patient  long  enough,  we  will 
uncover  the  origin  of the  program, which confirms 
that the program exists. If the person thinks they are 
subject to an illness, then the belief system also has to 
be  healed. It is  necessary to  heal where the  origin  of 
the illness began. 

Health is  the result of positive mental attitudes. It 
originates in the field of consciousness and reflects a 
level  of  consciousness  that  expresses  itself  on  the 
lower  physical  plane. An  expression  of health  origi­
nates  from 
the  fields  above  Neutral-out  of 
Willingness,  and  out  of lovingness, inner  joyfulness, 
and an inner state of peace. That which is  mental cal­
ibrates in the 400s, and that which is of Love is at 500 
and above. Spirit dominates at level 500 and becomes 
increasingly  consciously  aware  that  it  is  Spirit. 
Therefore,  the  intellect  is  not  man's  highest  faculty, 
contrary to  the  age  of reason  as  expressed  in  other 
learned works  or by those  intellectuals who  believe 
that the intellect is man's highest attribute. The intel­
lect is  only in the 400s. There is the nonlinear energy 
field  called  consciousness,  which  is  beyond  mind, 
logic, and reason and transcends mentalization, reveal­
ing a whole different paradigm and way of being. 

If we  understand illness, then we will  also  under­
stand  its  reverse,  which  is  health.  In  illness,  there  is 
always  unconscious  guilt  (calibrates  as  true),  a  state­
ment reaffirmed by research. There are whole· systems 
of  how  to  let  go  of  unconscious  guilt  through  the 
process of the willingness to forgive, to let go of criti­
cism and judgment, to let go  of right and wrong as an 

HEALTH 

115 

orientation  towards  life,  to  move  towards  forgiving­
ness, and through the desire to understand life  out of 
compassion.  This  resolution  of  negativity  requires 
recontextualization  of  perception  as  exemplified  by 
the transformative  effect of doing  the workbook of A 
Course in Miracles. 

We  find  that  illness  requires  several  components, 
including unconscious guilt and a mental belief system. 
The mind has to hold a certain belief for the person to 
accept that they are subject to it. It is as though uncon­
scious guilt looks for something to justify itself. Often a 
certain  illness  gets notoriety on  television  because  a 
celebrity shares their experience of it. That is followed 
by an epidemic  of that illness  because  of suggestion. 
The mind buys into the program, the belief system, and 
the  specificity  of  a  particular  disease.  Unconscious 
guilt  gives  it  power  by  expression  through  the  auto­
nomic  nervous  system  and  the  hormonal  balance 
through all the stress mechanisms within the body, and 
through the acupuncture energy system. 

With positive attitudes, the acupuncture energy sys­

tem is balanced, and the energy flow of health and life 
moves directly down through all the energy channels, 
stimulating all  the organs of the body. With a negative 
thought, the  energy flow  through  one  of the  twelve 
main meridians is interrupted and, if done repeatedly, 
disease  comes  about  in  the  affected  organ.  Negative 
emotions  potentiate  a  disease  process.  Unconscious 
guilt gives it energy, and the form the illness takes is a 
consequence of mental mechanisms because the body 
expresses what is believed. 

We  also have to look at how experience is actually 

116 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

experienced. The body itself is  insentient, as  curious 
as  that  may  seem.  It  has  no  capacity  to  experience 
itself. The  next  level  of  experience  comes  through 
sensations, from the senses of the body, so we do not 
experience the body; instead, we experience the sen­
sations of the body. Senses themselves have no innate 
capacity  to  experience  themselves. They  are  experi­
enced  in  mind. The  senses  report  what  is  going  on 
with the body, so we are several levels removed. Mind 
itself is  unable  to  experience  its  own  experience. It 
has  to be in  a  greater, larger energy field  than itself, 
and  in  this  case, it  is  the  energy field  of conscious­
ness. Because of consciousness, we are aware of what 
is going on in mind. Mind then tells us via the senses 
what is going on in the body. We  can see that percep­
tion is several levels removed from the physical body. 
Consciousness itself requires something greater than 
itself, called awareness. Awareness allows us to know 
what is going on in consciousness and reports what is 
happening within mind. Mind in turn reports what is 
happening about the body via the senses. 

That which we call 'myself' is many levels removed 
from  the physical body. It  is  necessary to understand 
that fact because we then see that the mind has power 
over  the  body. We  can  appreciate  the  physics  of the 
energy fields  of the  400s,  and  see  that,  just  by  their 
sheer power, they are  greater than  the  energy of the 
physical body.The physical body (calibration leve1200) 
does what the mind tells it to do.Therefore, if the mind 
says, "I have this disease," the body complies. 

We can thus see the importance of not buying into 
programs,  all  of  which  are  really  limitations  of  the 

HEALTH 

117 

truth. We  can  see  the  importance  of  consciously 
canceling  the  limiting  programs  and  instead  saying 
something that is  the truth. The truth is, "I  am an infi­
nite  being  not subject to that." So, when people  hear 
something  such  as, "Eggs  are  full  of cholesterol,  and 
cholesterol  gives  you  heart  disease,"  they  accept  the 
thought as the truth and buy into the belief system that 
the  cholesterol  in  eggs  will  raise  their  blood  choles­
terol. Their  bodies  simply  agree  and  raise  the  blood 
cholesterol when eggs are eaten. 

One  time  I  had  a  very  high  cholesterol  level  and 
began to cancel the belief system. I  repeatedly said, "I 
am an infmite being; I am not subject to that. I am only 
subject to what I hold in mind. This  does not apply to 
me, and I hereby cancel it and refuse it:' If the mind can 
program you with a negative belief system, it can also 
reverse  itself,  can  it  not?  Therefore, we  begin  telling 
ourself that the belief system has no effect on us, that 
it  is  only a  belief system, and  that we do  not have  to 
buy into it or go into agreement with it. 

When ~e  go into agreement with a belief system, 
we give  it the power of the collective energy of that 
belief. When we  refuse  it, we  then  release  ourselves 
from  the  collective  energy of the  belief system  and 
count ourselves  out. One  attitude  is  to  not buy into 
agreement with negative  belief systems that  have  to 
do  with  our  health. This  is  very  important  when  it 
comes to  epidemic  suggestion and hysteria. The pro­
gramming  that  comes  in  is  aided  and  abetted  by an 
emotional program. 

Much is  still heard about AIDS, for example, which 
is  accompanied  by  constant  repetition  in  the  media 

118 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that  play  on fear-fear  about  this,  anger  about  that, 
and, of course, the  guilt  about  this. What  better  dis­
ease to bring up all of man's feelings of sinfulness and 
guilt,  especially  about  one's  sexuality,  which  is  so 
common  in  all  cultures, not  just  ours?  Of course, it 
then  takes  on  a  negative  energy  when  the  coin  is 
turned over and becomes the lowest.What better area 
in which to create an epidemic to ensure the belief in 
it? There is  the unconscious guilt, not to mention the 
conscious  guilt  about  one's. sexuality,  the  sadness 
about it, the  grief over it, and the fear  about the  dis­
ease itself. All  this contributes to setting the stage for 
a mental belief system in an energy field of the 400s. 
There is  also  the negative  energy field  of fear, which 
is the energy field of the 1OOs, plus the guilt of calibra­
tion  level  30.  This  is  the  exact  set-up  for  disease 
because  the  mind  chooses  that  with  which  it  is 
impressed and uses that as  a form of expression. 

In  the  case  of the  cholesterol  experiment, I  can­
celed the thought every time it came up. After a short 
time, the cholesterol level decreased, and now I can eat 
three eggs for breakfast every morning, lots of cheese, 
even other high-eholesterol foods, yet my cholesterol is 
low and sometimes even below normal for my age. 

The body will  do exactly what the mind believes, 
but there is a credibility problem here.The person asks, 
"How could just my belief in that make it happen with­
in my life?" It is  due to the nature of the unconscious, 
which creates the opportunity for that to occur. There 
is  the  person  who  is  'accident  prone'  because  that 
belief has taken hold in their mind. Unconsciously, the 
person just manages to get their body in the right place 

HEALTH 

119 

at the right time in order to get hit by the fender of a 
car, or slip down the stairs, or get hit on the head.There 
is no need to worry about it because the mind will fmd 
a way. People just slip into a sort of hypnotic trance and 
expose  themselves  to  the  correct  opportunities  to  . 
make that program manifest in their lives (e.g., extreme 
sports, climbing Mt. ,Everest, etc.). 

There  have  been  many  experiments  with  a  cold 
virus,  for  instance,  in  which  one  hundred  volunteer 
subjects were  exposed to  very heavy doses  of a  cold 
virus. Interestingly, not everyone ended up with a cold, 
just a certain percentage. In other words, if the power 
were  in the virus  itself rather than within  conscious­
ness,  all  one  hundred  would  have  gotten  a  cold 
because  the  virus  is  so  potent. What  happens  is  that 
maybe  only sixty-five  percent will  get it because one­
third of the subjects do not believe in it. There is suffi­
cient  doubt  within  the  mind,  along  with  insufficient 
unconscious guilt. It is not acceptable to the person to 
express it in that form, so nothing is universal. 

The  same  thing  can  be  seen  with  healing. 
Pneumonia  or  bird  influenza  does  not  occur  in  one 
hundred percent of exposed people, just in  a  certain 
percentage  of them.  Comparably,  only  a  certain  per· 
centage  of people  will  respond  to  any  medical  treat­
ment.The difference is because those who do respond 
are  not dominated by unconscious guilt. Also, a  nega­
tive belief system is not operative because the particu­
lar illness  does not fit  any specific  thought form  they 
have bought into, so both sides of it-the sickness and 
the healing-are reflecting the energy that is  put into 
a certain belief system. 

120 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Health  is  the  willingness  to  let  go  of buying  into 
negativity. Why would a  person buy into  negativity in 
the first  place? Why are  some  people  so  receptive  to 
programming? There  are  people  who  become  fearful 
every time they open a magazine that reports about a 
current illness, which relates to the amount of fear and 
guilt  they  already  carry within  them. The  amount  of 
fear is really consequent to the amount of unconscious 
guilt. It is  as  though the vulnerable person is  attracted 
by fear, and when they hear of an illness, they become 
mentally  programmed  enough  to  make  it  happen  in 
their lives. 

Health  requires  the  willingness  to  adopt  mental 
attitudes that are positive  and constructive and to let 
go  of the  negative  ones. The  willingness  to  take  an 
easygoing  and  forgiving  attitude  towards  life  is  also 
beneficial,  along  with  the  unwillingness  to  buy  into 
negative programming. It takes the willingness to own 
the power of the mind.We give our power away when 
we go  into denial and blame  an illness on something 
'out there'. 

The  energy  fields  below  level  200  potentiate 
becoming a victim. Below 200, people have given their 
power away and placed it on something outside them­
selves.At the lower levels, people have told themselves 
unconsciously that the source  of their  happiness  and 
survival arises from something outside themselves. 

When  people  move  up  into  the  levels  of  truth 
above  200, the energy fields  are  now positive, and we 
can see that they are re-owning their power.They now 
say, "I, and I alone, have the power to create happiness 
and  opportunity in  my  life.  It  is  coming  from  within 

HEALTH 

121 

me." They  also  own  that  health  is  something  which 
comes from within and no longer believe they are the 
helpless victims of disease. 

In  reality,  we  are  not  the  victims  of viruses,  acci­
dents, cholesterol, or imbalanced uric acid levels.When 
we re-own our own power, we say, "It's  my mind that 
has  been  creating  that. My  mind  believes  that  eating 
liver and kidneys is  going to give  me  a high uric acid 
level that is going to give me gout. My mind is so pow­
erful  that  if I  believe  such  a  thing  to  be  true, it will 
make it happen." It takes  a  high level  of awareness to 
accept  that  the  mind  has  that  much  power. "Do  you 
mean to tell me that if I  believe that eating sugar and 
sweets is  going to give  me hypoglycemia, it will?"Yes, 
indeed, it will. 

In going back to the physics involved, it is  helpful 
to  remember  that  the  body's  energy  field  of  200  is 
weak compared to the belief systems of the 400s. The 
beliefs that sugar and sweets will cause hypoglycemia, 
diabetes, or being overweight are sufficient to bring it 
about. The  explanations  then given  are  denials  of the 
truth  and  rationalizations  to  justify  being  a  victim. 
When we say that it is scientifically proven, it is still just 
an explanation.The real science of it is the mechanism. 
The description of the mechanism of how this occurs 
on the physical plane is  still  only a  description of the 
mechanism, not of cause. 

Cause is on the level of mind; effect is on the level 
of body,  not  the  other way  around.  Merely  reversing 
that understanding  provides  the whole  key to  health 
and healing. Health then comes out of a positive men­
tal attitude, which we have heard many times, so much 

122 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

so  that  many  people  are  annoyed  by  it  because  it 
implies that if they have a sickness, they do not have a 
positive mental attitude. 

What is meant by mental attitude and the part that 

it plays in health and freedom from sickness and suffer­
ing?  Primary in  the  unhealthy  person is  unconscious 
guilt. The cure for  that is  the willingness  to be forgiv­
ing, even to the point of taking a course in forgiveness, 
if necessary, such as A Course in Miracles, or participat­
ing in Twelve-Step recovery groups, which are specifi­
cally designed to enable one to train the mind to let go 
of the  tendency to  criticize, attack, and  judge  others. 
These are replaced by the willingness to let go of judg­
mentalism.  Since  the  mechanism  is  unconscious,  the 
person may not see that when the mind is  being criti­
cal and judgmental of others, it is also critical and judg­
mental of one's own self. 

Unconscious guilt contributes to the negative energy 
that  expresses  itself  adversely  through  the  autonomic 
nervous  system  and  the  acupuncture  energy  system. 
However, simultaneously, there is the power of refusal, 
the power to deny the belief system.To own back one's 
power requires realizing that it is the mind itself that is 
the cause of the illness. This truth requires the willing­
ness  to  give  up  the  position  of victim  and  to  re-own 
one's  own  power, which  is  necessary for  health  and 
contributes  to  overall  spiritual  growth  and  develop­
ment. The  only  requirements  are  the  motivation  to 
move out of the negative energy patterns and the will­
ingness to face the truth about ourselves and choose to 
move into a positive energy field. This can actually be 
done rather rapidly. 

HEALTH 

123 

The  key  is  the  willingness  to  look  at  it  and  say, 
"Well, I  don't really  believe  this, but it is  said  that my 
mind  has  the  power  to  create  an  illness  within  my 
body, so I'm willing to look at that because I  have  an 
open mind." As  we  open our mind and are willing  to 
agree, our intention aligns  and we begin to move into 
accepting what we discover.We begin to find that mov­
ing into  lovingness  has  a  curative  and  healing  effect. 
How is  that accomplished? The willingness  to forgive 
can move us into the willingness to be compassionate. 
Having  compassion  means  the willingness  to  see  the 
innocence within all  things, which coincides with the 
willingness to forgive. Out of compassion and intention 
arise  the  power  and  capacity  to  really  see  into  the 
hearts  of  others  and  discover  the  innocence  of the 
child. 

Within  each  and  everyone  is  that  intrinsic  inno­
cence that never dies, no matter how long we live; it is 
intrinsic to the nature of consciousness itself.The inno­
cence of the child is  what bought the  mistake  or the 
negative program in the fIrst  place. It is  helpful to be 
aware  that  the intrinsic  innocence  of the child is  still 
present in everyone. It is  the ,innocence that watches 
televisi9n and naIvely buys into the negative program­
ming due to its lack of discernment. The innocence of 
the child has  no warning within it, nothing that says, 
"This  is  a  world  that  is  out  to  program  you  with  as 
much negativity as you are willing to buy." In fact, that 
world  gets  well  paid  to  do  so  because  advertising  is 
often based on appealing to the negative energy fields. 
All of our fears, desires, and pridefulness are represented 
below the level  of 200. It takes  the willingness  to be 

124 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

aware  that within  us  is  our innocence, and  that  that 
innocence needs to be protected. 

When we look at 'self-care', which is  the capacity 

to love one's self, we fmd it now means taking respon­
sibility to protect ourselves from the consequences of 
that innocence and the willingness to· undo mistakes 
that the mind picked up as  a result. We  can then han­
dle  looking  at  ourselves  and  healing  that  which  we 
find within us if we accept the awareness of the intrin­
sic innocence of our consciousness. We see that it was 
the  innocence  that  was  programmed. We  then  take 
responsibility  for  that  and  say,  "In  my  innocence,  I 
bought all that; I didn't know any better. I thought that 
the  right  thing  to  do  was  to  be  judgmental, to  con­
demn  people, and  to  judge  them  as  right  or wrong. 
Now I see that all that has made me sick, so I'm going 
to let it go."The people who were willing to look into 
this  and  go  through the  processes  already  described 
had complete, full  recoveries from their illnesses. 

The capacity to be forgiving is within us, along with 
the capacity for compassion. Out of it comes a general 
attitude about the way in which we look at ourselves. 
From our bigness, from  our greatness, we look at our 
humanness through forgiving eyes and begin to forgive 
ourselves as well as others for all the things that were 
limitations and denials of the truth.AlI the things in the 
energy  fields  below  200  are  denials  of the  truth;  all 
those  above  200  are  the  acceptance  of that which is 
true and positive. Because  the body reflects what the 
mind believes, and the mind reflects our spiritual posi­
tion, spirit has the greatest power of all. Therefore, our 
spiritual position literally determines whether we have 

HEALTH 

125 

a healthy physical body or not. 

Once we are willing to accept the power of mind, 
we have to be attentive, persevering, and not let mind 
get away with expressing negativity. We have to stop it 
as soon as we become aware of it.We begin to develop 
an awareness of negativity and recognize it for what it 
is. We let go of false humility and start questioning such 
remarks as, "Well, you know, I'm not very bright," or "My 
handwriting is poor," or "I gain weight eating the same 
amount of food  that thin people  eat." The  minute  we 
become  aware  of ourselves  saying  or  thinking  these 
limiting, self-defeating, self-attacking thoughts, we have 
to stop and cancel them. 

The  handwriting is  poor because  there  is  a  belief 
system  that  we  have  poor  handwriting,  so  we  then 
reverse  the whole programming of the mind as far  as 
cause  and effect. We  are  returning to  a  principle  that 
we  can  demonstrate  through  our  own  experience. 
It  is  physical and the  expression of the mental, not 
vice-versa. 

We came to the conclusion that our handwriting is 
poor because the cause was in the mind, in the belief 
system. It may  have  been a  remark  picked up  during 
childhood. Someone may have said, "Your handWriting 
is  poor," and from  that  point forward, the  program  is 
operative. We  have  to  look  at  the  ingenuity  of  the 
unconscious mind to really see it. It would be great if 
one had some experience in watching hypnotic exper­
iments. It has been shown that if a person is told their 
legs  will  be  itching  when  they  awaken,  and  then 
induce  amnesia for  that suggestion, when the person 
wakes  up, they are asked  how they feel.  Instantly the 

126 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

mind  will  start  creating  the  most  marvelous  and 
convincing argument of why the person's legs should 
itch. The  person doesn't  just say, "Well,  my  legs  itch." 
The  mind  always  gets  creative  and  starts  explaining, 
"Well, I have wool pants on, and you know I'm allergic 
to  wool, and the heat in this  room is  steam heat, and 
that always creates the itching:' It is  just marvelous to 
listen to the inventiveness of the mind as  it begins to 
create the reasons for the symptoms, which, as  stated 
above, were placed within the hypnotic subject on pur­
pose. The mind will do the same thing without formal 
hypnosis, so it is helpful to look at ourselves as though 
we have been hypnotized for half of our lives and did 
not even realize it. 

What  is  hypnosis?  It  is  suggestibility,  is  it  not?  It 
means  to  be  in  an  unguarded,  suggestible,  relaxed 
state, so anytime we have been in that state, we have 
picked  up  all  the  programming,  and  whether  we 
remember it  or not, it  is  still  operative. All  the  times 
we were half asleep as we sat in front of the television 
set,  hour  after  hour  of programming  went  into  the 
mind and became unconscious hypnotic programs. 

We  can discover what we have been programmed 
with by watching to see what comes up, such as  the 
idea that, "I'm no good. Oh, I'm no good, I'm no good. 
I never was very good at playing cards." If we have the 
belief system of not being very good at playing cards, 
that  is  what  is  going  to  operate  in our life  and  also 
reinforce  that  belief  system.  The  belief  systems 
become self-reinforcing and self-fulftlling prophecies. 
A belief that is  held unwittingly can manifest  in our 
life, thus justifying the belief system. By looking at our 

HEALTH 

127 

lives, we  can  tell  what  beliefs  are  being  held. If we 
cannot recall them, then we say they are unconscious 
or have been unwittingly picked up from  the collec­
tive consciousness of society. 

Health is the automatic expression of higher ener­
gy fields. The fields  of 540 and over are  the levels  of 
gratitude, forgiveness, and healing. The willingness. to 
be forgiving and grateful in itself automatically begins 
the  healing  process. Becoming a  loving  being  in the 
energy field  of love is  not sentimentality or emotion­
alism. What the world calls  love  is  more  often about 
dependency, control, sentimentalism, and  emotional­
ism.  It  is  an  emotional,  sentimental  attachment  in 
which control is going back and forth, and there is the 
satisfaction of desiringness on both sides. This  is  the 
Hollywood version of love. 

When  you  hear  someone  say,  "I  used  to  love 
George, but 1 don't anymore," it means that they never 
did  love  George. What  was  really  meant  is  that  they 
had  a  sentimental  attachment,  sort  of a  solar-plexus 
kind  of a  'hanging  onto', which the person romanti­
cized and glamorized within their life, pouring a lot of 
emotional  energy  into  it  so  that  when  that  tie  was 
broken, up came a lot of negative emotion. 

Real love is unconditional love. Unconditional love 
is a decision we make within ourselves. The process is 
one of intention and the  decision to  be a  loving  per­
son. If 1 decide to love you, that is  my inner decision. 
There  is  nothing  the  other  perso~  can  do  about  it. 
Therefore, one is not the victim of what goes on in the 
world  because  the  decision  to  love  creates  a  stable 
energy  field  of  unconditionality. The  other  person's 

128 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

behavior may not be pleasing or contribute to what is 
desired,  but  it  does  not  change  the  lovingness.  For 
example, the mother who visits her son who is a mur­
derer in prison for  twenty years  still  loves  the  being­
ness,  the  'is-ness'  of who  he  really  is.  Of course,  his 
behavior  does  not  make  her  happy,  but  the  love  is 
unconditional, no matter what he does. We  see exam­
ples  in  the  world  of the  unconditional  lovingness  of 
the  mother, and the lovingness  of twelve-step  groups, 
such  as Alcoholics Anonymous.  Unconditional  love  is 
not concerned with what you have or with the past. 

The people at the lower levels of consciousness are 
very concerned with havingness and rate others based 
on what they have. In the middle  of the Map, people 
are preoccupied with doingness, and their status rating 
depends on what they do and all the titles that go with 
that  doingness. As  they move  towards  the  top  of the 
Map, people are  concerned with what they are, with 
what  they  have  become-their 'is-ness',  their  being­
ness, that  which  they truly  are. At  that  level,  there  is 
concern  with  a  person's  stature, their  value,  and  the 
kind of person they have become. 

The  willingness  to  become  a  forgiVing  person 

who nurtures all  of life  nonjudgmentally automatical­
ly  brings  that  about  within  oneself  because  of  the 
very healing nature of that energy field. It is  a  condi­
tion  of good health  and  the  beginning  of seeing the 
perfection of all  things  and  how all  things work out 
for the good. Illness cannot stem from that context. 

For the person who is oriented in the direction of 

health, illness merely becomes something that is com­
ing up in order to be healed; it is bringing up a lesson. 

HEALTH 

129 

The  illness  is  saying, "Look  at  me. Please  heal  what  I 
stand for and symbolize. Please heal the guiltiness, self­
hatred, and limiting thought forms. Please move up to 
loving me so I  can be healed." The illness  is  a demand 
to grow spiritually. It is an incessant gadfly that tells us 
that  something  is  'out'  and  needs  to  be  looked  at. 
Something needs to be held in a different way. 

It is not the events of life but how we hold them in 

mind that creates our reaction. Events in and of them­
selves have no power to affect how we feel, one way or 
another. What does affect  us  is  our position and judg­
ment about them, and how we decide to be with them. 
Our  attitude,  our point  of view,  the  context, and  the 
overall  meaning  give  the  event  the  emotional power 
over uS.We can see that we are the creator of the mean­
ing and impact it has on us. 

Stress comes from our giving externals power over 
our life, which  comes  from  the position  of victim, of 
putting  the  source  of happiness  outside  our life  and 
denying  the  power  of  our  own  mind. The  healing 
comes about through re-owning that power and realiz­
ing that we and we alone create the meaning of any cir­
cumstance, event, place, position, thing, or any person 
in our life.We create the meaning, our position, and the 
way we hold it. That either becomes a  source of heal­
ing  or a  source of illness. We  are  the ones who deter­
mine the outcome. 

Eventually we begin to  see  that the  body is  like  a 
pet or a little marionette. It happily goes along its way 
as a consequence of the energy fields of joyfulness and 
gladness. It just sort of does what it does automatically, 
without thinking  much  about it. 'Healthy' means  that 

130 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

we pay less and less attention to the body and enjoy it 
out of appreciation. It is  an expression of how we are 
with that body. 

Being healthy means we have re-owned our power 
as  source  and are  not giving  away  the  source  of the 
body's health to the world.The exercising we do is out 
of the joyfulness of experiencing the body. We  do not 
say that swimming causes the body to be healthy, but 
we  instead  come from  the position that because we 
enjoy the body, we enjoy activities such as swimming. 
Those  activities  that the world  considers healthy are 
the expression of our inner sense of aliveness.There is 
joy in allowing the body's expression in ways that the 
world considers healthy, not because they are  causal, 
but because they are the effect. 

The healthy enjoyment of the body is the effect of 
the  mental  attitude,  of  looking  at  it  as  something 
pleasurable, and therefore, we come to a lovingness of 
the body. It is  not a  narcissistic  self-glorification, or a 
muscle man's picture in the photo magazine. It is not 
out  of  desiringness,  pridefulness,  or  narcissism,  but 
out of lovingness and gratitude.We say, "Ah, little body, 
you serve me well. I love you, I appreciate you, and I 
value  you." To  know  that  we  are  not  the  body  and 
merely realize  that if we lose  our right arm, we will 
still say, "I  am me." If we lose our left arm, we will still 
say, "I  am me." If we lose both legs, we will still be say­
ing, "I  am me." If we  remove  the  ears, etc., the  body 
progressively  diminishes  to  almost  nothing, and yet, 
the sense of self is ever with us. 

The  healthy  person  begins  to  develop  a  sense  of 
self  that  is  independent  of  external  events  and  of 

HEALTH 

131 

being  the  body  itself. The  person  is  aware  that  the 
body is the body and events are events, but "I am 'me', 
and  that  which  1  am  is  really  untouched  by  these 
events."The self that wakes  up every morning before 
it  even  begins  to  remember  its  name  and  address, 
where  it  is,  and  what  it  is  supposed  to  do  today 
remains unimpaired.There is the 'hardware' innocence 
of consciousness that in itself is unaffected by the pro­
grams  of  the  'software'  and  the  events  that  occur 
throughout life.A healthy attitude is one that does not 
base its reality or survival on that which is transitory. 
At the lower levels of consciousness, it can be seen 
that the person has placed their survival on something 
outside  themselves, and  that it is  always  transitory in 
nature. One thing we know about the world for certain 
is  that  all  things  change. Consequently, if we  put the 
source of our happiness or our survival on that which 
is outside of ourselves, such as our job, our possessions, 
or a particular relationship, then we are merely setting 
ourselves  up for  the  loss  of our health because  what 
comes  up frrst  is  the fear  of loss. Even  though that is 
not conscious, we know if the source of our happiness 
is in our title, position, address, the kind of car we have, 
or even in the beauty of the physical body, we feel vul­
nerable. That  vulnerability  is  in  the  unconscious  and 
stores  up  a  great  deal  of  fear.  As  a  result,  our  lives 
become endlessly focused on reinforcing and protect­
ing ourselves from the loss of those things upon which 
we have based their survival. 

Healthy persons realize the true nature of who they 
really are, and that they are something far beyond that. 
They realize  they are the  ones who give  those  things 

132 

HEALlNGAND  RECOVERY 

value and temporary enjoyment, but their survival does 
not depend on them. Previously it was said that when 
people move  up  into  the  energy field  of acceptance, 
they  have  stopped  giving  their  power  away  to  the 
world. They have  begun  to  accept  that  they  are  the 
source of their happiness. If we were to put that per­
son on a desert island and return a year later, we know 
they would have a coconut business going, would have 
found  a  new  relationship,  would  have  built  a  tree 
house, and would be teaching native children. In other 
words,  they have  the  capacity  to  re-create  for  them­
selves  because  they  know  the  source  of  happiness 
comes from the realization that "I myself am the source 
of that happiness. I  myself am the source of health. It 
doesn't depend on epidemics, or what is  out there in 
the world, or what I eat."When they fmally realize that, 
they begin to transcend and are no longer at the effect 
of all the false  belief systems. 

What kind of life is possible then? What kind of life 
evolves from canceling these belief systems? The mind 
says, "Uh-oh, if I cancel these belief systems, then I am 
really going to  be in trouble." There is  a  state of mind 
that places its  security on the worship  of fear.  It says 
that  paying  attention  to  these  fearful  thoughts  and 
complying with them is why they are alive. 

When  motivated  by  the  willingness  to  own  and 
accept the power of the mind, the willingness to undo 
its mistakes and be forgiving and compassionate, there 
is the realization that we make ourselves victims when 
we place the source of happiness outside ourselves.As 
we begin to recontextualize our life, we ask, "What is it 
that gives my life meaning? What do I really value? What 

HEALTH 

133 

is it that if you were to remove it from my life, my life 
would still have meaning? If my job and position were 
taken  away,  what  meaning  would  my  life  have  then? 
What would it be worth? What am I willing to die for?" 
Introspection  and  spiritual  movement  are  neces­
sary to achieve a state of well-being, a feeling that one's 
life is significant, and that we make a difference in the 
world. We do not need the attention that illness brings 
to us because our sense of importance comes through 
the realization of the greatness of our real Self. General 
growth  in  the  field  of  spiritual  development  brings 
about a  condition of health and can do so quite rapid­
ly if we change our position to let go of certain limited 
beliefs. It does not take very long at all. First is the real­
ization that we have the power to do it. Second is  the 
willingness  to try it out, to verify it through our own 
experience, and to accept the recovery of other people 
as an inspiration. We  have enough faith in them to say, 
"Well, if it works for them, then I'm willing to give it a 
try." 

In my personal as well as clinical experience, I have 
seen illnesses leave in a matter of minutes, days, weeks, 
or months.The most chronic illness that had existed for 
twenty-five years took perhaps two years to leave and 
fmally did so by my constantly doing the processes that 
have already been described. 

Some  illnesses  are  persistent  despite  all  one's 

efforts to clear away contributing factors, and the rea­
sons  are  often  multifactorial.  One  that  is  commonly 
overlooked  by  citizens  of the  culture  of the Western 
world is the factor of karma, both individual and col­
lective. In its broadest sense, karma merely refers  to 

134 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the  totality of one's  inheritance  by virtue  of human 
existence itself as represented by evolution, both phys­
ical and spiritual. Each human being already has a cali­
bratable level  of consciousness  at birth, which is  also 
aligned with genetic patterning. 

Spiritual evolution itself may well bring up karmic 
patterns  from  the  individual  as  well  as  the  collective 
unconscious; therefore, spiritual work may paradoxically 
bring  repressed  patterns  into  manifestation.  This  is 
characteristic  of the  life  histories  of mystics  who fre­
quently went through periods of illness. Sometimes the 
basis of a persistent illness can be discerned by simple 
past-life recall techniques, such as hypnosis or induced 
altered states of consciousness. The basis for a  persist­
ent  illness  is  often  quite  specific,  and  processing  it 
through forgiveness  of self and others for  a  forgotten 
event turns out to be curative. 

Another  technique  is  to  forgive  in  oneself  that 
unconscious aspect (from the collective unconscious) 
that was  responsible  for  occasioning  it  in  others  and 
thereby  bring  up  the  inner  healer  from  within.  For 
example, if an illness is characterized by lameness, then 
forgive  the one in oneself that was responsible for the 
lameness  of others, for  example. While  at flISt  such a 
process may seem speculative, positive  results  can be 
amazing. 

Healing  ensues from  the willingness to accept the 
power of mind, and the willingness to never allow the 
mind to say something negative without challenging it 
and  replacing  it with a  positive  thought. The willing­
ness to let go of being judgmental towards oneself and 
others is the result of letting go of the negative.Why is 

HEALTH 

135 

this so? It is  because the energy field of that which we 
truly are is  ever present and gives us an intense sense 
of aliveness  when we let go  of the obstacles. It is  the 
energy field  of the  vibration  of life  itself that  is  con­
stantly present. 

like the  sun, the  inner Self is  always  shining, but 
because of negative clouds, we do not experience it. It 
is not necessary to program oneself with the truth; it is 
only  necessary  to  remove  that  which  is  false.  The 
removal  of the clouds  from  the  sky to  illuminate  the 
negative allows one to experience the energy fields of 
that which is positive. It is only the removal of the neg­
ative that is necessary-the willingness to let go of the 
habits  of negative  thinking. The removal of the  obsta­
cles to the experiencing of this will result in an increas­
ing sense of aliveness and a joy of one's own existence. 
As  this  joy  comes  in,  frrst  subtly  and  then  more  and 
more strongly, there is a diminished awareness of even 
the presence of the body, of one's physicality. 

As  one  evolves  into  higher  levels  of  happiness, 
there is joyfulness.The body is looked at as  a source of 
pleasure  and  is  held  as  a  pleasurable  and  enjoyable 
experience. As we move towards the highest levels  of 
consciousness, the experiencing of the body begins to 
diminish altogether. There is  a pervasive experiencing 
of diffuse  joy, along with an inner, progressive state of 
serenity, accompanied by a peaceful blissfulness.At this 
point, the experience of the body may disappear alto­
gether into a kind of sublime state in which one is  joy­
ful aliveness. One becomes loving bliss, and the aware­
ness  of the  body may  be  almost  nonexistent. It is  as 
though  it  is  present  in  the  room,  but  it  is  no  more 

136 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

important than anything else in the room. There is the 
loss  of identification  with  the  body,  and we  watch it 
from  that viewpoint  as  it happily goes  about its  busi­
ness. We  are no more concerned about it than we are 
about anything else in the room. It is a loss of identifi­
cation with the  separate, limited  self and  the  limited 
physical. With this, the body is expressing the absolute 
truth, the  infmite  truth that  one  is  included with the 
infinite Beingness ofthe universe.Therefore, there is the 
value of replacing the space that contained the negative 
thought which was canceled with the statement, "I  am 
an infmite being and I am not subject to that:' Because 
our essence is aligned with the Reality ofTruth, we con­
sequently have the power to negate falsity. 

We replace everything we cancel with the truth. In 
place  of the  negative  thought, we  put  in  something 
that is  positive  beca~se  we  choose  to  love  ourselves 
instead. We  can say, "1 cancel that; I no longer buy that; 
I'm not subject to that. Instead, I choose to love myself." 
We  can see that lovingness is  the great healer. We have 
within our capacity, within our power, all the abilities of 
self-healing.All we have to do is remove the obstacles. 
Perfect  health  is  an  expression  of spiritual  aware­
ness. It is the willingness to let go of the negative and 
allow  it  to  be  replaced  by  that  which  is  loving. The 
physical expression of sickness is  of the lower energy 
field  that  is  given  form  by  what  is  held  in  mind. 
Physical  health  is  merely  an  expression  of a  positive 
energy  field  that  is  reinforced  by  our willingness  to 
commit  to  compassion  and forgiveness. That  which  I 
am  includes  the  body  but  is  not  limited  to  it. That 
which I am chooses to love it, to value it, to be appre­

HEALTH 

137 

ciative of it, to be grateful for it, and to enjoy the sense 
of aliveness. 

We  eventually get to the level of the 'experiencing 
of experience'. We  become  the  awareness  of the  joy 
and  the  thankfulness  for  our existence  and  the  exis­
tence of our consciousness. The body is then included 
within the field of consciousness itself. We come again 
to  the  surprising  thought that the  body is within the 
mind. Most people with a  limited belief system think 
that  the  mind  is  somewhere  'up  here' in  their  head. 
Actually, when it is being experienced, it is found to be 
everywhere. When a thought is being experienced, it is 
being  experienced  everywhere.  The  thought  that 
seems  to be occurring somewhere 'in here' is  itself a 
belief system as it is actually being experienced every­
where. It is  a  thought  about  a  thought. Inner  experi­
ence will tell us that the experience of the thought and 
the  experience  of the  body are  occurring  nonlocally 
everywhere. Thoughts are  occurring in consciousness 
itself. We  understand  that  the  body  is  sitting  in  the 
chair, but that understanding  is  being experienced in 
no specific place. It is happening within consciousness 
itself.Addressing ourselves to health is really addressing 
the  nature of consciousness  and  appreciation for  our 
own existence as the aliveness of life itself. 

In this  chapter, certain things have been repeated 
several  times  because  of  the  mind's  resistance  to 
accepting the truth of it. Right-brain  learning is  really 
about becoming familiar with and constantly re-expos­
ing  ourselves to the same viewpoint until it  becomes 
natural. It is difficult when weare dealing with healing 
and health because we are really reversing the mind's 

138 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

belief in causality.We are saying that the physical is the 
expression of the mental, and not vice-versa.The world 
would like  to  say that it is  the  other way around and 
that  'cause'  is  within  the  world, within  the  virus,  or 
within the bacteria. Even medications work because of 
our tremendous belief that they will. It is  the belief in 
the  power  of the  medicine. This  is  certainly  obvious 
with  scientific  research  into  the  nature  of placebos. 
Placebos alone will generally cure thirty-five percent of 
the people with  any given  illness. Just the  suggestion 
that this pill will heal it thirty-five  percent of the time 
is  all  that is necessary for it to occur. Realizing that we 
are making a major move in consciousness allows us to 
value all our knowledge about illness and health and to 
use it as a springboard to our own spiritual growth and 
development. 

As  in  all  spiritual  work,  it  is  discovered  that  the 
mind resists letting go of negative programs despite the 
suffering that it occasions.The source of this resistance 
is  the  secret payoff that the  ego  gets  from  negativity. 
The  ego  derives  pleasure from 'justified' resentments, 
blame, self-pity,  and  all  the  rest. Thus, what has  to  be 
surrendered is the gratification the mind gets from the 
negativity.To undo the addiction to the payoff, it is only 
necessary to ask oneself if the suffering of the illness is 
worth clinging to the pleasure of the negative attitude. 
Secretly, people just 'love' to hate, blame, and get even 
as well as  being 'right' or 'superior' , and more. Nursing 
grievances extracts a  cost in being prone to illness as 
well as resistance to recovery. Self-honesty is therefore 
the key to making progress and increasing well-being. 
Despite all the above, it is  also important to realize 

HEALTH 

139 

that  just  being  a  human  being  means  that  one  has 
inherited  the  limitations  and  vulnerabilities  of proto­
plasm itself, and thus, one's days  are numbered. "From 
dust one has  arisen" and "to dust will return" signifies 
the value of humility and acceptance of the limitations 
of humanness itself. As  the Buddha said, "To  be born a 
human is  a  great gift for  the human has the option of 
earning karmic merit and undoing negative karma. 

CHAPTER  5 

Spiritual First Aid 

Next, we're going to discuss the need for spiritual ftrst 
aid  and  the  various  principles  we  have  discovered 
through  research,  including  things  not  so  generally 
known  but  of great  importance  to  those  involved  in 
spiritual work and the spiritual aspects of life. 

Previously,  we  have  discussed  the  relationship 
between body, mind, and spirit, how the body reflects 
what  the  mind  believes,  and  how  the  mind  then 
reflects  what  is  held  in  consciousness. We  have  also 
talked  about  handling  problems  directly  within  the 
area  in  which they  are  experienced, which  is  within 
consciousness itself. 

As  explained  earlier,  the  body  is  experienced  via 
the senses in mind. Mind does not experience itself but 
is experienced in a greater energy fteld called conscious­
ness.1bis 'nonlinear' energy fteld  is  directly  related  to 
spiritual ftrst aid. 

It is valuable to create a safe context from which to 
approach one's spiritual work, something that is usually 
not  taken  into  consideration.  For  the  last  thirty-ftve 
years,  we  have  been  researching  the  nature  of con­
sciousness itself. Spiritual research is not common.As a 
result, we have learned a great deal because not much 
has ever been written about it. 

There are many questions the ordinary person has, 
for  example, what  can  one  bring  to  the  entire  fteld? 
How can one approach it?  How can one create a  safe 
context for personal investigation of these matters that 
are of great importance? 

141 

142 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

As we discuss all of this, we will be referring again 
to  the  Map  of  Consciousness.  It  comprises  the 
research  of  many  individuals  and  groups  over  the 
years. It is a mathematical model that represents strat­
ified  levels  of consciousness  which  man  commonly 
experiences. The levels have been calibrated as to the 
progressive power of their energy fields  showing, for 
example, that Apathy  carries  much  less  energy  than 
Fear. Fear has  less  energy than the  level  of Courage, 
and  so  on. These  calibrations  start  at  zero, continue 
upward to  the  level  of Enlightenment  at  the  energy 
field that calibrates at 600, and then on to the highest 
fields  of  Enlightenment  at  calibration  level  1,000, 
which is  the maximum level for the human domain. 

The  exact  way  in  which  the  energy  fields  were 
originally  calibrated  is  a  whole  field  of  inquiry  in 
itself.  It  is  possible  to  confirm  the  calibrations  by 
using the muscle-testing  method. As  you may already 
know, it is  a  simple  method of testing  the resistance 
of one's  arm. The  subject  holds  out  an  arm  and  the 
tester presses  down  on the wrist. If anything  that  is 
being held in mind, such as  an angry, fearful, or hate­
ful 
the  Map  of 
is  below  200  on 
Consciousness  (the  level  of Courage  and Truth), the 
arm goes weak. It indicates nonintegrity of the energy 
field, and the downward direction of the energy field 
indicates a negative answer. 

thought, 

If that which is loving and true is held in mind and 

the arm is  tested, it will be strong. You can have some­
one test you and say, "Anger is over 75; it is over 100; it 
is  over 125; it is  over 150; it is  over 155," and you will 
go  weak  at  155, indicating  that  anger  is  around  150. 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

143 

One can then ask what level Grief is and come up with 
75, illustrating that grief therefore has much less energy 
than anger. 

These  are  very  useful  calibrations  and  tell  us  a 
great deal of importance as to the direction of energy 
and whether it has a destructive, or negative, effect on 
our life, our consciousness, and our capacity to com­
prehend  and  reflect  truth. The  calibrations  have  a 
very positive effect, which we will see as we move up 
towards  Enlightenment and Christ Consciousness. As 
one gets closer to  the Truth, one is  closer to God. As 
one moves  toward the bottom of the  scale, one gets 
farther away from Truth and God. 

If you have someone test you when you purposely 
tell  a  lie,  the  arm  will  be weak. When  you  have  the 
person test you again when you tell the truth, the arm 
will instantly be strong. This is  a very useful indicator 
because  it provides  an  orientation  towards  any field 
of  knowledge  or  endeavor.  It  can  also  be  useful  in 
working our way through the maze of what the world 
calls 'spiritual'. 

In the  beginning of the research, we were  naive. 
We  assumed  that  anything  labeled  as  'spiritual' must 
be  of  the  highest  truth,  valid,  and  something  that 
could  be  corroborated  through  one's  inner  experi­
ence. We  found  that this  is  not necessarily the  case, 
and what is  labeled  a  spiritual teaching might  range 
anywhere over the Map of Consciousness, all the way 
from the bottom of the Map, where the teaching was 
written by those who teach hate as  the way to truth, 
up to those who are most infinitely loving. We  found 
that  many  of the  books  were  of  a  negative  energy 

144 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

field, meaning that one would end up in a worse con­
dition from getting involved in that particular field of 
learning and would move farther away from the truth 
than before reading about it.Almost half the books in 
a typical spiritual bookstore are actually fiction. 

As  a  result,  we  had  to  look  at  the  value  of the 
research  itself.  In  looking  at  the  field  of  spiritual 
research, we found there were no real guidelines for 
the  person  approaching  spiritual  work  for  the  first 
time or going back into it later in life with a renewed 
interest.  Each  approach  claimed  that  it  represented 
the  truth,  so  the  self-claims  were  no  indication  of 
validity. We  also  found  that  the  number  of followers 
and the glamour and riches of the teacher of a certain 
pathway  had  no  correlation  with  its  validity-the 
number of followers  meant nothing, and  best sellers 
were frequently purely fictional. 

A purported teacher could have  a  great many fol­
lowers, and yet  we  discovered  that  the  energy field 
was  in  a  negative  direction, with  calibrations  being 
very  low. As  we  got  closer  to  the  truth  of the  great 
enlightened beings that were acknowledged by all of 
mankind,  the  energies  always  moved  upward  in  a 
positive  direction. The  calibrations were always  over 
600 and on up into the  700s. Therefore, we see how 
the  great  teachers-those called  avatars-who were 
on the planet for  only a very short period of earthly 
time, changed  the  face  of the  world  and  the  belief 
systems of mankind, breaking new ground and creat­
ing  a  whole  new context  and  set  of values  because 
the power and energy of their words were of such a 
high caliber. 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

145 

We will be talking about crisis, conflict, the nature 
of an upset, and ways  of handling, transcending, and 
breaking  through,  along  with  practical  measures 
for spiritual seekers. We will find that all upsets are 
spiritual in origin and have common sources.We will 
learn  how  to  survive  these  inner  trials  and  how  to 
avoid disillusionment, despair, and self-hatred. We will 
discover how to detect false  teachers. (See page  188, 
Reality,  Spirituality,  and Modern Man, or page 379, 
Truth vs. Falsehood.) We will see that all spiritual pain 
and suffering is really due to ignorance and will learn 
how to find the answer. The vulnerabilities that come 
from spiritual naIvete, along with crises, can be over­
come  by utilizing  the laws  of consciousness. We  will 
see what we are hanging onto and how to let it go.We 
will learn how to recognize the culprit called the spir­
itual ego, which is behind so much spiritual crises and 
suffering. The  spiritual  world  is  frankly  one  of great 
confusion, with  its  conflicting  statements  andposi­
tions. We  need to approach it from a position outside 
the field. 

Referring  again  to  the  Map  of Consciousness, the 
energy fields are calibrated as to their relative energies, 
starting with Death  at zero, Shame  at  20, Guilt at  30, 
Apathy  at  50,  Grief at  75, Fear  at  100, Desire  at  125, 
Anger  at  150,  Pride  at  175,  and  the  crucial  point  of 
Courage at 200.At this level, the direction of the arrows 
changes  from  negative  to  neutral. Above  neutral,  the 
arrows  point  upward,  in  a  positive  direction;  this 
occurs  when  the  truth  is  told  about  something. The 
attitudes  or positions  now indicate  Neutrality at  250, 
Willingness  at  310, Acceptance  at 350, Reason at 400, 

146 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Love  at  500, (which is  a very significant level), joy at 
540; and Ecstasy at 560. Level 600 is Bliss and beyond 
the world of duality. It is a level of Enlightenment that 
reveals the true nature of God (Sat-chit-ananda). 

Awareness of the true nature of God really begins 
at  level  200  as  one  becomes  progressively  aligned 
with  truth  and  then  progresses  upward  through 
Willingness, Abundance, Acceptance, and  an  increas­
ing  Lovingness  that  expands  in  an  infmite,  upward 
direction. 

Each  of these  levels  of consciousness  is  charac­
terized  by  correlated  emotions  that  begin  as  the 
most negative  and  destructive  at the  bottom of the 
Map  and lead to  suicide, self-hatred, etc. Also  at  the 
bottom are guilt, the process of destruction, and see­
ing the world as  a place of sin, suffering, temptation, 
and  disaster. The  God  of that  world  is  seen,  there­
fore, as  the ultimate destroyer who is  really the ulti­
mate  enemy of mankind because  he  hates man  and 
will  throw  him  into  hell  forever,  which  is  the  ulti­
mate act of hatred. 

Above that is the level ofApathy, which calibrates 
at  50. The  emotion  is  that  of a  hopeless  world  of 
despair, and the process is  the loss  of the energy of 
life. The  world  looks  hopeless,  and  the  God  of  a 
hopeless world is unloving, does not care for people, 
ignores them, and views them as sinful worms.There 
is  an abject hopelessness, and God is  thought to be 
truly  nonexistent.  There  is  now  the  existentialist 
who  talks  about  the  hopelessness  of mankind  and 
the death of God as  coming out of this level of con-. 
sciousness. 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

147 

The  level  of Grief is  one  of loss,  regret,  despon­
dence, and loss of spirit. It sees a world of sadness and, 
again, a God who is uncaring and unloving, having cre­
ated a sad, hopeless world. 

The level above Grief is Fear and is an energy field 

moving in a destructive direction. This level is charac­
terized  by  worry,  anxiety,  panic,  and  terror. There  is 
deflation, and the world looks like a frightening place. 
The creator and God of this frightening world is there­
fore  a  punitive  god  who  terrifies  by  his  unending 
threats. 

Above  Fear is  the  level  called Desire, with which 
most of us  are very familiar.  People are  entrapped by 
the emotions of wanting and craving.They are trapped 
by what they desire, and this creates the worldview of 
frustration and a  God from whom they are  separated 
because  this  god  is  always  withholding  from  them 
what they need to feel  complete and whole. 

The  next  energy field  upward  is Anger  and  is  of 
great importance. The energy of Anger at 150 is much 
greater than that of Grief at 75.A person in grief has 
very little  energy, but it is  obvious  that an angry per­
son has an enormous amount of energy. The emotions 
arising  from  this  level  are  of resentment, hatred, and 
grievance,  which  occurred  in  the  process  in  con­
sciousness  as  one  of  expansion.  From  the  place  of 
anger  one  sees  a  competitive  world  of war,  conflict, 
and enemies. Therefore, God becomes polarized and a 
retaliatory and angry god-the great punisher. 

Above Anger is the level of Pride, and in its applica­
tion to spiritual work, the level of Spiritual Pride at 175. 
It can be seen that as  one moves up the scale of con­

148 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

sciousness, there is more power.The fields begin to feel 
better, but Pride is still a destructive emotion, as agreed 
to by all the spiritual literature. It is characterized by an 
arrogance and contempt headed by denial.The process 
going on in consciousness at this level is  one of infla­
tion.  Because  of  arrogance  and  contempt,  a  person 
with  this  attitude  about  their  spiritual  work  is  not 
going to be willing to talk things over. 

The  person  at  the  level  of Pride  perceives  every­
thing  in  terms  of vanity,  self-importance,  and  status, 
which leads to a view of God that can be in one of two 
directions. It can be the  atheistic  position that comes 
out of intellectual arrogance and says that the left-brain 
intellect is  the  highest faculty  of man, and, therefore, 
reason  will  decide  whether God  exists  or not. It  can 
also  be from  the  position  of the  zealot  or bigot who 
claims that they have all knowledge of the subject, and 
who is  in a prideful state, arrogant and contemptuous 
of any  other  position  (e.g., "death  to  infidels"). This 
obViously comes from an inflated ego.All the positions 
up through this level are below the line of integrity at 
level 200. 

What happens when we cross the line of 200, the 

level of Courage  and Truth, the level where the mus­
cle-strength test no longer goes weak? Now a person 
is  able  to begin looking openly at questions because 
they are  in the power to do so. The level of Courage 
is  one  of  opportunity,  open-mindedness,  and  the 
opening  strata  for  anyone  who  is  serious  about 
spiritual work. 

The next energy field  is  called Neutral at 250. Just 
below it at 200, we had an open mind, but at this level, 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

149 

we become unattached  as  the  energy field  now goes 
upward  in  a  positive  direction. We  are  now  released 
and free  to  research, investigate, and fmd  out for  our­
selves. At  this  energy level, the world looks  okay,  and 
the God of that 'okay' world is a God of freedom, and a 
God  who  loves  one's  innate  capacity to want to fmd 
out the truth for oneself. 

The next level is Willingness, where one has let go 
of resistance and attachment and has begun to say "yes" 
and  join, agree, and align with the  search for  and the 
truth  of one's  inner  experience  of it. The  person has 
introduced one's own positive intention; therefore, the 
world in which this is occurring appears friendly, and 
the  future  looks  hopeful  and  promising. The  view  of 
the God of this kind of world is promising, hopeful, and 
very positive. It is the God of freedom. 

At  the  bottom  of the  scale  was  a  very  negative­
looking  God  who  was  more  demonic,  threatening, 
and punitive.At the level of Willingness is a God who 
becomes a friend, one who can be trusted. This is the 
beginning  of  a  loving  God  and  the  opening  where 
one can begin to be willing to perhaps see God as  a 
positive aspect. 

From there is  the movement up to Acceptance at 

350 where a person now starts to feel a certain confi­
dence and transformation of consciousness. One real­
izes that the power to discover the Truth resides with­
in the self. 

The lower levels of consciousness hold thatTruth is 
outside of self. IfTruth is outside of self, it will have to 
be revealed by someone because the energy is  so low 
at these  levels. All  the  energy fields  are  in  a  negative 

150 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

direction,  preventing  one  to  be  able  to  discover  the 
truth on their own. 

At the level of Acceptance, the power is  re-owned 

within oneself. Therefore, the road begins to be a posi­
tive experience.The search now starts to become har­
monious, and the God of that energy field is a merciful 
God who is  accepting. In the re-owning of one's own 
power, God is  pleased. This God is viewed as  having a 
positive attitude towards one's spiritual search. 

From  that  point, one  moves  up  in  a  very  positive 

direction to the field of lovingness at 500, which is nur­
turing, supportive, and forgiving.As one moves into the 
desire  to be a  loving person, the inner healings  begin 
to take place, and one gets to experience life as loving 
despite  its  emotional  ups  and downs. The  process  of 
life  itself and the innate  nature  of what is  happening 
are loving and come from a God of Unconditional Love 
and lovingness.This discovery leads to an inner state of 
Joy.As one begins to periodically experience the joyful 
states, one's  orientation becomes compassionate. It is 
the beginning of a progressive shift in process, in con­
sciousness, and in seeing God as perfection and incred­
ible beauty.There is movement into the capacity to see 
God from the viewpoint of Oneness and Unity. 

Movement up toward 600 takes one into the levels 

that the world calls Enlightenment. There is  a progres­
sive loss of identification with the small self, which the 
world calls 'ego' and is  commonly referred to  as  'I' or 
'me' because  it is  identifying with the various  energy 
fields  and  the  kinds  of behaviors  that  ensue. As  that 
identification  and  points  of  view  are  surrendered, 
expansion takes  place  as  one's context of experience 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

151 

enlarges,  and  one  moves  upward  towards  the  top  of 
the scale and identification with the true Self. 

The  states  that  emerge  at  level  600  are  termed 

'Bliss'. These are states of infInite joyfulness, of experi­
encing an infInite  Presence, and are  the consequence 
of letting  go  of identification  with  the  small  self.  In 
moving toward Enlightenment, one experiences states 
of  illumination  and  sees  God  and  the  world  as 
Oneness. One  also  experiences  God  as  the Source  of 
Existence. Within the  enlightened  states  over 600  are 
the  avatars,  the  great  saints,  the  great  teachers  of 
mankind, the sages, and the enlightened beings. 

At least now there is an idea of the way to God. God 
is at the top of the Map; that which is  not God is in the 
other direction, at the bottom. This  is  rather clear and 
may seem simple when viewed; however, it is common 
sense  and  something we  all  intuitively  know. We· will 
refer to this in the future now that we have an orienta­
tion to the field. 

That which is  truthful carries  greater power and 
calibrates at a higher number. It is a higher frequency, 
and in physics, the  higher the frequency, the greater 
the power. Electrical power, for example, is not trans­
mitted across the countryside at  120 volts; it is trans­
mitted at 30,000 volts or even higher. The higher the 
frequency,  the  greater  the  power. This  is  why  the 
words  of  the  great  teachers  have  transformed 
mankind for thousands of years. Their words are still 
active  and  powerful  and  continue  to  transform  the 
consciousness  of mankind  thousands  of years  later, 
even though their bodies  have  left  the  planet. When 
we  calibrate  the  energy fields  of their work, we  see 

152 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that they are of enormous power, so it is not just what 
is said, it is  the power of the being who says it. 

It has  been discovered  that, historically,  there  has 
really been no safe  context or orientation available  to 
people approaching this field, so the way to avoid spir­
itual  crises  and  the  need  for  spiritual  first  aid  in  the 
future  is  to  back  up  a  bit  and  do  some  individual 
research. The first  question to ask about any teaching 
is, "What  is  the  level  of the  teaching?" This  is  helpful 
because  the  child  within  continues  to  be  naIve  and 
innocent. The  innocence, on the  other  hand, is  what 
leads to error because the innocent mind of the child 
has  no  means  of discernment. It  needs  some  way  to 
determine  what  is  going  to  be  beneficiaL (See  list  of 
Spiritual  Teachers  in  Chapter  17,  Truth  versus 
Falsehood.) 

It is  obvious  that if one  is  involved  in  a  teaching 

that has an energy field below 200, one will have neg­
ative  experiences. In  contrast,  a  teaching  that  has  a 
positive  energy field  and calibrates  at  a  high level  is 
going  to  lead  into  a  lovingness,  which  is  the  best 
insurance against spiritual catastrophe. One can ask if 
the teaching, teacher of that teaching, or the books of 
the teaching are reflecting a high leveL This is  not to 
say it  is  right  or wrong; it  is  just beneficial to  deter­
mine its leveL 

If a teaching is below 200, at Hatred, for example, 
it  will  say  that  God  hates  you,  your  behavior,  your 
impulses, and your humanness. Thus, this is  a  God of 
hatred,  and  the  energy  field  is  negative,  calibrating 
even as low as 20,30, or 40.At that level is hatred, the 
killing of others, and suicide. There is  a  God of death 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

153 

rather than of life. Self-hatred and an inner feeling  of 
being destroyed come from this teaching. If one wish­
es  to follow  such a  pathway, at least one  is  going in 
with their eyes open (e.g., terrorism). 

There  are  the  teachings  of  existentialism  that 
focus  on  man's  hopelessness. They  are  based  upon 
worshipping the past in which there is a great deal of 
grief and self-pity toward what has befallen this group 
of  people.  There  are  teachings  and  teachers  who 
express  and  exploit  the  energy  field  called  Fear,  in 
which case the person experiences a fear of God as a 
punitive  God. The  energy field  is  in a  negative  direc­
tion and continues to engender fear. 

All  these  negative  fields  have  proponents  who 

sound convincing. They are like politicians in the reli­
gious or spiritual world and very adept at their con­
vincingness. Yet,  when  we  check  their  energy  and 
direction, we fmd that their teaching of fear  is  nega­
tive and destructive. When seeing them on television, 
we can turn off the sound and look at their faces and 
fist-shaking gestures to see what they reveal when dis­
connected from the words.When tested, these people 
make us go weak, indicating that what is being taught 
is  not Truth.  Research  shows  that  God  is  not  at  the 
bottom of the scale; all the teachings of hate and fear 
that come from  the bottom of the scale indicate the 
reverse. 

As we move up into Anger, we see those positions 
that  promote  anger,  conflict,  hatred,  and  religious 
wars because they are competitive and usually cham­
pion  a· politicized  god  of retaliation.  Because  it  is  a 
polarized position, it is  always  viewed that  God will 

154 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

punish the nonbelievers, which is  usually one of the 
traditional  teachings. It is  important to  know where 
this calibrates on the scale so we can see how it cor­
relates with those things that are truthful. 

The purpose of all  this is  to create a safe context, 
a safe orientation, and a safe space in which to do our 
spiritual work because  in spiritual work, we commit 
ourselves to certain goals and purposes as a result of 
our intention, and  certain things  will  come  up  dur­
ing  that  process.  Frequently,  one  cause  of spiritual 
crises  is  that  the  person  forgets  they  initiated  a 
process through their own intention, and their experi­
ence is a result of having asked the question, made the 
commitment, and aligned themselves with a search for 
the truth. 

DefIning  oneself in a  certain way has great power. 
When we look at the power of the mind, we can see 
how crucial its beliefs are. It has the ability to bring up 
within  one's  life  the  very  thing  one  has  asked  for. 
Frequently  in  the  middle  of a  crisis,  the  person  has 
forgotten  they  really  asked  to  bring  up  that  which 
needs  to  be  healed. Therefore, what  is  occurring  in 
their life is not a mistake or an error. It is exactly what 
needs to be brought up, looked at, understood, surren­
dered,  recontextualized,  healed,  and  forgiven.  As  a 
result, one needs to maintain a compassionate view. 

How  can  we  heal  what  comes  up  in  our  lives 
unless we hold a  healing position?  It is  obvious how 
critically important it is  to know the energy field of a 
given teaching. (See Chapters 16 and 17 in Truth  ver­
sus Falsehood. If it requires forgiveness, the teaching 
of the  Christ  is  based  on  forgiveness.  It  if  requires 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

155 

compassion  and  understanding,  then  the  teaching 
will  have  to  be  at  calibration  level  500  and  over 
because healing begins at 540. That which the world 
calls sin is  obviously something that requires healing, 
does it not? Then a healing that is at least at the level 
of 540 is needed. 

To  ask people to bring up something from within 
into  a  negative  energy field  is  to  bring  about  upset; 
therefore it is  unsafe to go into any spiritual teaching 
whatsoever  that  suggests  introspection,  soul  search­
ing,  and  purification  unless  the  energy  field  of that 
teaching or pathway is positive and at 540 or higher. It 
is evident how dangerous a lower-level teaching could 
be-it would be like putting oneself on the operating 
table  and  letting  one's  abdomen  be  opened up  by a 
surgeon who does not have the skill to handle what he 
is  going to discover when he does so. We  don't allow 
a  second-year medical student to  open abdomens on 
the  operating  table.  Instead,  it  is  done  by  someone 
who has the power. These energy fields have power. It 
requires a great deal of power and knowledge to open 
up someone's insides and investigate them. 

We  don't advise introspection in the beginning of 
the inner process of purification until it is determined 
that the teacher, teaching, and those around a  person 
are in the energy field of at least 540, a field that is nur­
turing, supportive, and forgiving  and has the purpose 
of healing  through  understanding  and  true  compas­
sion.The God of that kind of energy field would there­
fore  be  a  God  who  loves  us  because  healing  only 
occurs through loving, and His  love would be uncon­
ditional. 

156 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

It we understand the nature of God at all, we real­
ize  that  that  which  is  godly  is  unconditional.  That 
which  is  conditional  and  therefore  limited  by  defmi­
tion  could  not  be  called  godly. That  which  is  God  is 
beyond all  condition and is infinite, so the love is infI­
nite lovingness and therefore infmitely capable of heal­
ing. To  create a safe context and space for ourselves, it 
is  necessary to know that we are in a  safe  space, that 
the teacher and the teaching are positive in direction, 
that  the  energy field  is  at least  540, and that it holds 
compassion and forgiveness in a very high place with­
in the teaching; otherwise, it will be unable to heal that 
which is  brought forth. 

In calibrating literally thousands of factors in vari­
ous teachings and pathways, it consistently appeared 
that those  who  calibrated the  highest and in  a  posi­
tive  direction  were  characterized  by the  absence  of 
teachings  of hatred  or  condemnation  in  any  way.  It 
was  found  that  great  compassion  and  a  calibration 
over 600 characterized the great teachers and teach­
ings. They  spoke  from  an  infinite,  compassionate 
forgiveness  towards  one's  humanness  and  viewed it 
as  something that needed to be healed. In the higher 
teachings, there  is  a  lack of concern with a  person's 
money or status, and  there  is  no  desire  to control  a 
person's  personal  life. There  is  no  'make  wrong'  or 
invalidation of life in any of its aspects. How is this so? 
For  example, it  is  not money itself but the  way it is 
held in mind. It is not the events of life but one's posi­
tion about them. 

The great teachings, which are  in a  positive  direc­
tion, present basic  principles through which one  can 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

157 

experience  the  truth  of oneself through  one's  inner 
spiritual  work.  The  creation  of  a  safe  space  then 
requires  teachers  who  have  no  desire  to  exploit  or 
invalidate  anyone  and are  therefore  examples of their 
own principles. They are devoid of exploitation of fol­
lowers for 'the  sake  of the  movement' or 'the  cause'. 
There is avoidance of that common polarization of 'us' 
versus 'them' .There is a necessity to remain clear about 
the difference  between the logical phenomenal world 
and that which is  spiritual. There is no preoccupation 
with form in the spiritual world but instead with non­
linear basic principles that then express through all the 
levels of reality. 

The creation of a safe  place characterizes teachers 
who have no wish to exploit or invalidate, so the great 
teachers have  no interest in influencing one's money, 
life  decisions, or personal  life.  Many  of them  actually 
refuse  to answer questions on that level. Instead, they 
exemplify and speak of the teaching of a principle. It is 
then left up to  the student or the follower  to discern 
how to  apply that principle in  a  given  situation. As  a 
result,  there  are  no 'make  wrongs';  there  is  only  the 
teaching of a greater context from which to hold that 
life experience. 

Referring to the Map of Consciousness, we can see 
how various  things  can  be  held. We  can  single  out  a 
world  event  that,  in  itself,  is  of no  particular  signifi­
cance. It  is  how we  hold  it,  the  meaning. we  project 
onto it, and the significance we give it  that makes the 
difference. In and of itself, it really has no meaning; the 
meaning depends on our own level  of consciousness, 
or the level of consciousness of the teaching. We  will 

158 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

use money as  an example because it is  often a  source 
of  conflict  among  spiritual  seekers,  at  least  in  the 
beginning. 

How would one look at money? It would depend 
on the  energy field  of the  teaching or the teacher. It 
could be something one feels  guilty about or is  sinful 
to have. God will destroy us if we have money, and we 
can hate ourself for having it. The whole process is  a 
destructive one because it is in a negative energy field 
with a very low calibration relating to Truth. 

Money  could  be  viewed  from  a  higher  energy 
field, such as Fear, in which having money would then 
be  a  frightening  thing,  with  accompanying  worry, 
.anxiety, and panic. It would be viewed as 'unspiritual' , 
with  resulting  punishment from  God; or it might  be 
the source of hatred, resentment, and grievance, with 
the money then being used by the spiritual group in 
a competitive, retaliatory way towards others, leading 
to anger and religious war. 

Money might  be  held  from  the  level  of Pride, in 
which it is a status symbol that God has given us. The 
more God loves us, the more money he gives  us; this 
thought comes from an inflated process. 

When  people  move  up  to  a  higher  energy field, 
they now become unattached to the money. They are 
released,  and  the  money  does  not  'run'  them  any 
more. It is now okay to have money because the God 
of that  energy field  is  a  God  of freedom.  God is  not 
concerned about whether one has money. 

As we move up the scale into Acceptance, we might 
be willing to view this  differently. As  we  move on up 
into  the  energy fields  of Love  and  Gratitude  at  level 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

159 

540, money  might  be viewed as  a  gift  from  God for 
which we  are  grateful. The  money would then  be  a 
tool,  a  way  of expressing  compassion  and  uncondi­
tional  lovingness  towards  the  suffering  of the world 
because  the  energy  field  of Love  nurtures  and  sup­
ports love, life, and  all  its  teflections. It is  the begin­
ning  of a  revelation  because  there  is  the  release  of 
endorphins in the brain that leads to seeing money as 
a loving thing and a way to support others. The inten­
tion  behind it  and the way it  is  held in mind  at  this 
level would  have  one viewing  the  money as  a  bless­
ing, a responsibility, a stewardship, and a way of help­
ing and supporting others. The money would then be 
used for the benefit of mankind and not as an egotisti­
cal gesture that would get one's name on a brass plate 
from  the receiving organization. The money would be 
used as  a  gift while acknowledging the source  as  the 
love  of  God  and  seeing  it  as  a  positive  expression. 
Everything  in  Creation  belongs  to  God,  including 
money, of which we have only temporary custody. 

As  one  moves  towards  the  top  of  the  field  into 
Oneness  and  perfection,  one  sees  that  all  things  are 
aspects of God, and God is All that Is. One begins to see 
Divinity within all things, and that this applies to every­
thing in life. Now, instead of seeing money as  sinful, it 
is seen as a tool God has given us so that lovingness can 
be expressed in a greater field  and can help large seg­
ments of mankind. Money can then be held in joy from 
which one can feel an inner gladness that one has been 
given  the  power, with money being an expression of 
God's power on earth, to bring about the healing of the 
inner pain and suffering of mankind. 

160 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

The expression and nurturing of love is the desire 
coming out of compassion for the relief of suffering. 
Money  then  becomes  a  tool  to  enable  one  to  help 
relieve  the  suffering  of the world. Assets  are  heJd  as 
gifts  from  God, and  the  gifts  are  then  used  to  bring 
about the increasing knowledge of man and the relief 
of  suffering  that  occurs  through  the  progressive 
increase of man's knowledge ofTruth. 

After the problem relating to money, the next one 
is  always  sex, is  it  not? We  will  look  at  sex  and  see 
how  the  conflicts  arising  around  it  depend  on  the 
energy field.  Sex, an  event in  human life  and part of 
humanness, could be viewed from the bottom of the 
scale  (lust,  addiction,  craving). The  teaching  coming 
out of this energy field would perceive it as negative 
and  associated  with sin  and  suffering for which  the 
God  of  that  level  is  the  great  destroyer,  with  the 
process  being  one  of destruction,  self-hatred,  self­
pity, and self-blame. 

The next view would be that man's sexuality is a 
hopeless  condition-one  of  despair,  loss  of energy, 
and the lack of the capacity to experience aliveness. 
It might be viewed as sad and regretful that man is an 
animal. At the bottom of the scale, man is viewed as a 
body. As  we  cross  the  line  at  Truth  (200),  man  is 
viewed less and less as a body, and progressively there 
is the realization that he is spirit. However, that which 
views man as a body then condemns it and is sad that 
man is  such an animal. Those who are  dominated by 
fear  would  view  sexuality  with  worry,  anxiety,  and 
panic.They would treat the whole subject as frighten­
ing  and  think it best to  deny and  just ignore  it alto­

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

161 

gether because the  God  of that level  is  punitive  and 
would punish one for any. sexuality. 

Looking at the scale, one can see the various ways, 
including  anger,  with  which  people  can  hold  sex. 
There are  people who hate themselves for their own 
sexuality  as  well  as  those  who  exploit  seduction. 
There are the perversions of religion, the satanic soci­
eties, and others in which sexuality and seduction are 
now reversed, and their expressions inflate its impor­
tance out of proportion. 

How would sexuality be held at the level of truth? 

At this level, one begins to face and handle what sexu­
ality  is  from  a  spiritual  Viewpoint.  One  begins  to 
become empowered, to take the opportunity, because 
the God at this level is  one of an open mind and free­
dom, the freedom that it is okay to explore this because 
at this level, one is  not attached to any position about 
sex. At this level, one comes from humility. This means 
that one says, "I  really don't know the  answer to  this 
subject; however, I  am willing  to begin to  look at it." 
Because the willingness is a positive energy field, it says 
that  this  is  a  friendly,  promising, and hopeful  subject 
that  one  can  investigate. When. one's  intention  has 
been added to clear up the  subject, there is  a  certain 
confidence that there is  the capacity in a harmonious 
world with a  merciful God to now explore it without 
being thrown into hellfire. 

When sex is viewed from an energy field of 500 and 
over, it is now from a place of lovingness and gratitude. 
It is seen as  an expression of nurturance, support, and 
healing, and that making love is a healing, forgiving act. 
People who have argued and fought  before now melt 

162 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

in the  embrace, forgiving, nurturing, and healing each 
other.They reafftrm each other's worth and value. Now 
sexuality becomes  a  gift  and an expression of love. It 
eventually  becomes  an  expression  of  unconditional 
love,  joy,  and  the  celebration  of one's  own  aliveness 
and existence. There is a gratitude to God for the joy 
of  existence,  the  beginning  of  transfiguration  and 
revelation,  and  then  the' moving  on  to  Bliss. Those 
who move on to higher states of consciousness see it 
as  an expression of oneness and a way of being. It is 
a  way  of being  and  a  way  of joining  the  masculine 
and feminine energies in the world. 

Sexuality, money, or anything else is  held primarily 
as  a  point of view. In none of these instances can we 
say what a thing is, in and of itself. It cannot be taken 
out  of the  fteld  of understanding  that  is  concordant 
with  its  level  of consciousness. When  a  person  or  a 
teaching  expresses  attitudes,  beliefs,  or  opinions,  it 
will  be found  they are  merely  opinions. The  essence 
itself is  not being talked about; it is  just how the per­
son views it (perception). How they hold it in mind is 
an  expression  of  their  level  of  consciousness,  their 
degree of awareness of truth.The lower their view, the 
more negative they will look at any human behavior. 

All  things  can  be  viewed  from  a  'make  wrong' 
position because the bottom of the scale is an endless 
'make wrong', an invalidation of life  in all  its  expres­
sions.  All  man's  intentions,  impulses,  biology,  psy­
chology, even his spiritual ambitions and the desire to 
be a spiritual seeker, can be invalidated because there 
is  sure to be a skeptic who will deride it. 

We can move out of this by seeing clearly that there 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

163 

is  the  event  in  the  world,  there  is  life  itself,  human 
nature  is  what it is, and  there  is  a  way of being with 
that and viewing it, which is  expressing a level of con­
sciousness. We  are  still not saying anything about that 
'out there'; instead, we are talking about one's level of 
consciousness. Nothing  is  really  being  said  about  the 
world itself (e.g., perception rather than essence). 

All  the  enlightened beings  at  the  very top  of the 
scale  say  that  aU  is  God  and  that  a  'thing'  is  merely 
what it is (essence).They place no constriction or val­
uation of right or wrong on it.They see the sacredness 
of all of existence; therefore, there is no invalidation. If 
all is God, then to invalidate any part of it would be to 
invalidate God. Man, along with his expressions, being 
God's  creation,  would  least  of  all  be  invalidated  by 
God.  Instead, the  great  beings  teach  a  principle  that 
leads to understanding.The highest teachers say that if 
you  follow  a  certain  course,  certain  things  will  hap­
pen; they then leave the rest up to you: 

A very good example of such pure teaching in our 
society is  that of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).AA takes 
no position about whether you drink or not. It does not 
try to close up the liquor industry or try to convince 
you to stop drinking. However, it does say that for those 
who have a problem, this is what we do, and these are 
the results. If you continue to drink, these will be the 
results. There is  no 'making wrong' or invalidation. No 
one  is  looking  for  any  power  nor  do  they  wish  to 
exploit  anyone. AA  has  no possessions, no  royalty,  no 
government,  no  buildings,  and  no  glamour.  It is  just 
pure  spiritual  principle  that  allows  an  individual  to 
have the freedom to see the truth in it for oneself and 

164 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

to apply it in one's own life if desired. 

This is an example of a high teaching;AA calibrates 
at 540, which one would expect. An  energy field  that 
heals would have to be a  teaching that is  in a positive 
direction  and  calibrates  at  least  at  540. AA  stands,  of 
course, as  an example of healing that is  based on the 
physical, mental, and spiritual aspects of man. It is said 
that no healing from addiction can occur without spir­
itual growth and development. 

What  happened  in· the  lives  of saints  is  that  they 
descended to the bottom of the scale, which played a 
major  part  in  their  inner  experience  prior  to  their 
achieVing  a  higher state of awareness. This was a  con­
sequence of their research into their inner selves.They 
finally  brought  up  the  very  bottom  of the  scale  and 
faced  the  formerly  unconscious  and  then  conscious 
conception of self as that which is ultimately separated 
from God. The bottom of the scale represents the ulti­
mate separation from God. 

The agony and self-hatred of the exquisite sense of 
sinfulness  did  not  bring  about  the  discovery  of God 
within sin but instead brought about surrender. In each 
and every case, there was the agonizing experience of 
being so far from God that the person let go.There was 
the  willingness  to  let go  and accept  God  as  Divinity. 
They then moved up to a situation called surrender, an 
energy field that calibrates at 575.They removed them­
selves from the energy field  of 30 by fmally giving up 
and surrendering to God, which opened the way to the 
experience ofTruth. 

Those  who  became  enlightened  often  went 
through  agonizing  periods  of facing  the  utmost  of 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

165 

negative experiencing that was buried in their uncon­
scious, of owning their own shadow, of looking at what 
they had held as  most hateful and owning it, and then 
letting go of it (the 'dark night of the soul').The letting 
go of what was the farthest removed from the truth in 
those positions  at the bottom of the  scale, the letting 
go of those positions that came out of self-honesty, led 
to the realization of the Truth. 

The progressive letting go of positions and moving 
into an ever-enlarging context brings us to the overall 
general nature of spiritual work itself. All  that is within 
the  Scale  of Consciousness  is  the  ego, from  high  ego 
states to low ego states. The letting go progressively is 
beneficial  because  the  levels  represent  points  of 
view-the letting go of judgment and vanity that come 
out  of prideful "I  know."  Surrender  through  humility 
allows. the process of revelation by which the truth is 
revealed. There is the progressive process of letting go 
of these  restrictive  positions,  all  of which  block  the 
inner  consciousness  and  awareness  of the  truth. This 
awareness automatically emerges out of an energy field 
and gets progressively higher until it finally  reaches  a 
point where one is open to the Grace of God. 

Another difficulty now arises in spiritual work and 
brings  about crises  and conflicts, which is  the  use  of 
the term 'ego' in a pejorative, 'make wrong' kind of way. 
People will say, "Well, that is only the ego." 

In looking at this from  the viewpoint of Truth, we 
can  see  there  is  no  such  thing  as  'just  ego'. It would 
mean  that  there  is  some  place  where  God  is  not. All 
positions represent ego, and the ego is  then superim­
posed on that which is  not ego. There has to be some­

166 

HEALlNG  AND  RECOVERY 

thing larger, which is  consciousness itself. To  safely do 
spiritual work and avoid crises, it is  necessary to  reaf­
firm, look within, and discover one's own innocence. It 
really is  not safe to do spiritual work unless one has a 
glimpse of that innate naive innocence and keeps one 
eye  on  it  at  all  times,  because  that  innocence  is  the 
gateway back to the Truth so one does not get lost in 
the swamp. 

How do we see that innocence and know its pres­
ence? We know that enlightened beings say that all  are 
one with God, and consequently, that which is  intrinsi­
cally innocent is within us at all times.The knowingness 
can occur as a matter of revelation or understanding. 

If we look at the consciousness of the child, we see 

the  child's  innocence.  Everyone  agrees  on  the  inno­
cence of the child whose consciousness is not devious. 
It hasn't learned to lie; it  hasn't learned the values  of 
judgment  and  criticism. The  child  is openly  trusting 
and innocent, and out of this  innocence and trusting­
ness, paradoxically, it begins to learn that which is  not 
the  truth. He  or she  hears  the  parents  say, "We  don't 
play with certain children because they are the wrong 
race,  creed,  or  color;  they  belong  to  the  wrong  reli­
gion;' and so hatred is  taught to the child. In order for 
the child to be loyal to the family, to honor and love its 
mother and father, the child has to adopt that teaching. 
As  a result, the innocence of the child is  exploited 
by that which is not the truth, and that which is not the 
truth innocently comes through, generation after gen­
eration,  via  the  parents,  grandparents,  other  family 
members, friends, teachers, television, storybooks, and 
novels.  So  that  which  is  intrinsically  innocent  now 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

167 

begins to take unto itself programs and beliefs that are 
not the truth.  ­

We can compare the consciousness of the child to 
the  hardware  of  a  computer,  and  the  programming 
coming in from the social consciousness of the world 
itself is the software. We see that in the computer, the 
hardware, which is intrinsically innocent, is uncontam­
inated by the software.You can run any kind of igno­
rance of negativity or falsehood  through a  computer, 
and the computer itself is  uncontaminated. You put in 
the  next  CD,  and  the  computer's  capacity  is  unim­
paired.  Likewise,  that  intrinsic  innocence  within 
consciousness  itself is  unimpaired, and  that  intrinsic 
innocence  is  reading  these  words  right  now.  It  is 
the intrinsic innocence of one's consciousness that 
is  listening, reading, trying to find  the truth, trying 
to tune itself in to what is  real. That childlike inno­
cence is  unchanged throughout one's entire life; it 
never leaves. 

When looking at what the world calls ego, or what 
spiritual work calls  ego, instead of condemning it, we 
can see, out of innocence, that is  what we believed at 
the time. What we did was appropriate if that software 
program had been correct. Therefore, we do  not ever 
really make a 'mistake' in our spiritual work. Everything 
is on purpose once we set our intention to achieve an 
understanding  of the  truth  and be  open to  Grace  so 
that  the  truth  may  be  revealed  in  whatever way  we 
wish to hold in mind, in whatever expression is  most 
appropriate. It is important to remember that we have 
asked  for  all  that  is  in  error  (i.e.,  ignorance)  to  be 
brought up for recognition. It is all right to do that if we 

168 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

realize our innate innocence at the same time. 

We  again  ask, The  innocence  of what?  It  is  the 
innocence not ofus as a person but the innocence of 
consciousness  itself  because,  as  a  person,  we  are 
merely reflecting that which is universal as conscious­
ness itself. What has gone on has happened as a result 
of the nature of consciousness; therefore, there is  no 
point in going into personal self-condemnation about 
it nor, on the opposite side of the coin, going into per­
sonal pride about it. 

Discovering the nature of consciousness itself and 
looking  into  the  nature  of that  consciousness  in  our 
own  introspection  reveals  that  everything  we  have 
believed in during our whole life has happened out of 
innocence.  Compassion  and  uIiderstanding  develop, 
and because of that compassion, we can now see that, 
through our own innocence, we have come to believe 
what we believe.The willingness to forgive then allows 
us to see into the hearts of others. Out of our own com­
passion, we  can see  the  innocence  of the  child  over 
and over. No matter what the age of the body, the con­
sciousness has remained unchanged. We  can still hear 
the heart of the child within the adult saying "won't," 
"don't," and so forth; it is the innocence of the child still 
speaking. We  need to keep  an eye  on that to prevent 
spiritual crises. It heals conflicts as  they arise. 

The  reaffirmation  of  our  innocence  consists  of 
never buying that anything is 'just' ego; there is no such 
thing as 'just' ego. Ego,  the  software, social  conscious­
ness,  ~nd  the  programming have  been  superimposed 
on that which is  not ego  but on truth itself and con­
sciousness itself.All spiritual crises come from context, 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

169 

meaning, and the way in which a  thing  is  held. If we 
think: our diet is  an unspiritual diet, or our lifestyle  or 
what we do for a living are unspiritual, they are merely 
reflecting a certain level of consciousness. 

Those  who  have  reached very high  levels  of con­

sciousness condemn nothing.They will affIrm, however, 
that  certain  levels  of consciousness  will  have  conse-· 
quences, and that a certain lifestyle, one of selling out 
the truth about oneself, will bring inner pain and griev­
ance.  It  is  left  up  to  the  individual  to  continue  the 
process,  and  there  is  no  attempt  to  control  anyone. 
Certain  behaviors  or  self-eondemnation  will  activate 
energy fields that will be experienced as painfuLAgain, 
it is left to the individual to continue or not. However, 
it is  then not seen as  a  threat but as  merely  a  fact  of 
human  consciousness  that  inner  agony  can  become 
greater than what  it  already  is  if one  violates  certain 
principles. The teaching still  holds up that it can be a 
very  high  teaching  even  though  it  may warn  us  that 
very  agonizing,  painful  states  of  consciousness  can 
come about as a result of certain behaViors. 

All  the  experience  within  human  consciousness, 
including all spiritual work, represents a position, a way 
of being with, and a way of holding what weare always 
talking  about.  Even  though  we  think:  we  are  talking 
about the external world, it is really an inner position 
as a consequence of a certain level of consciousness, of 
how we choose to  be with something, and  the pains 
and agonies that come about as a result of our clinging 
onto putting our survival on something that is not the 
truth. Pain tells  us that we have put our survival onto 
something  that  is  a  violation  of some  principle  of 

170 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

consciousness. That  is  really  what  spiritual  work  is 
about. 

The progressive pain of these positions tells us that 
they are far from the truth, not that they are 'wrong' .As 
we  get  closer  to  the  experience  of the  Presence  of 
God, the inner experience is  one of increasing joy and 
happiness. As  we get farther from it, it tells us that we 
are  far  removed  from  the  truth. Therefore, it  is  not  a 
'make wrong'. It is  not right or wrong, it is  just that it 
is  painful and does not work. 

The  Buddha  said  that  all  pain  and  suffering  are 
based on attachment and desire. A greater elaboration 
is that desire arises out of fear, which is a consequence 
of a  sense of lack and the belief that one is  separated 
from God. Desire itself leads to progressive frustration 
and  a  feeling  of  being  separated  from  the  truth. 
Constant wanting and craving lead to entrapment and 
bondage.There is no 'right' or 'wrong' about it.The con­
sequences  of  this  endless  frustration  lead  to  anger. 
Acquisition or desire leads  to pridefulness and fear  of 
loss. Failure of ambition may lead to apathy or guilt.The 
consequences of ego positions do not support moving 
toward the truth. 

Noticeable  is  that  negative  energy  fields  tend  to 
bring forth all the ego positions so that desire does not 
remain pure. It tends to bring with it anger, pride, fear, 
grief,  and  apathy.  Grief tends  to  be  accompanied  by 
fearful, angry desire, and each of these tends to attract 
the other. 

The critical point in all  spiritual work is the capac­
ity to be willing to tell the truth. Very often that truth 
is "I  don't know," and out of the "I  don't know" comes 

SPIRITUAL  FIRST  AID 

171 

the willingness  to  surrender to God. The truth comes 
about  through  the  act  of surrender. The  truth  is  not 
'causing'the  pain, and it  is  a  mistake  to worship  the 
pain and think that suffering is therefore the royal road 
to  Enlightenment. It  is  by realizing  that  the  suffering 
within oneself is not due to the truth but to the unwill­
ingness  to let falsehood  go. It is  by surrender to  God 
that the truth is revealed. 

By  remembering  our  inner  innocence  when  we 
begin spiritual work, we ask to have that which is not 
the  truth  brought  to  our  awareness. The  process  is 
therefore the evidence of success.As a result, there may 
be a somewhat chaotic appearance to the lives of peo­
ple who are labeled spiritual seekers.The inner person 
is  pleased  because  it  says, "I  have  been  asked  to  see 
what stands  between  me  and  the  truth, and  that  has 
been brought up from my awareness to be recognized, 
re-owned, recontextualized, and healed:' We  provide a 
safe  space  and  context  about  our  spiritual  work  by 
being  centered  in  the  Heart-not the  physical  heart, 
but from the ultimate compassion, the owning of our­
self from  this  level, the  joy of the  spiritual  work, and 
the  saying "thank you" to  all the  things  that come up 
out of gratitude. The crisis is the very event of the spir­
itual  healing.  It  is  out  of the  crises  that  the  healing 
occurs. 

CHAPTER  6 

Sexuality 

Applying the knowledge derived from the study of the 
nature of consciousness to common human problems, 
we will  now focus  on the  area of sexuality, including 
the difference between sex and making love, between 
high-energy and low-energy sex, how to transcend feel­
ing guilty, and the effect of social programming about 
sexuality. We  will learn how to experience it from the 
heart instead of from just the body; how to make it an 
uplifting  and  grand  experience  rather  than  one  of 
manipulation  and control; and  how to  get  out of the 
energy interactions  that result  in impotence, frigidity, 
and sexual dysfunction. 

We  will explore questions like "Does God approve 

of sex?""Is sex all over with advancing age?""Does 'mid­
dle  age' mean that we're 'over the hill'?"The  answers 
will be addressed from the viewpoint of consciousness 
itself and from  the position of 'body, mind, and spirit' 
about which one hears so much in the field of holistic 
health. 

What does 'body, mind, and spirit' mean? Is  it a slo­
gan or just a catch phrase? What is 'spirit,' anyway? Is it 
something we can experience? Is  there an energy to it 
that we  can discover  through  our own research  into 
our  inner  experiences?  The  focus  will  be  on  inner 
experiences, on  subtle  states  of inner  awareness  and 
the  part  they  play  in  this  important  area  of human 
behavior. 

Initially, we will again review the nature of the rela­
tionship between body, mind, and spirit.We will review 

173 

174 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

where that human experience is experienced, and dis­
cuss  and  demystify  consciousness  itself,  making  it 
understandable. Reference will be made to the Map of 
Consciousness, which  will  be  very  helpful  in  under­
standing the nature of the relationship between body, 
mind, and spirit. 

What is that relationship? First, as noted previously, 
is  the  fact  that  the  body  cannot  experience  itself. 
When talking about sexuality, everyone automatically 
thinks of the body and its allure, physicality, and form. 
Astonishingly  enough, when one looks  at  it, there  is 
the  realization  that  the  body  is  insentient  in  that  it 
cannot experience itself. The arm cannot experience 
its armness, and the leg cannot experience its legness. 
Something greater than that has  to  take  place  before 
experience happens. The body is experienced through 
sensations. One experiences not the body but the sen­
sations of the body-where it is  in space and motion. 
The sensations themselves cannot, of their own, really 
experience  themselves. They,  too,  have  to  be  experi­
enced in something larger, which is in mind. 

When looked at carefully, one realizes they are not 
experiencing the body or the  sensations of the body 
but instead are experiencing what is going on in mind 
about  the  body.  Even  mind  itself,  curiously  enough, 
cannot  experience  itself. A thought  does  not experi­
ence its thoughtness; a feeling does not experience its 
feelingness.  Something  larger  than  mind  has  to  be 
present,  something  that  is  unchanging  in  itself. The 
reason we become aware of what is going on in mind 
is  because  of consciousness, which  is  a  much  larger 
energy field  than that  of mind. Mind  tells  us what is 

SEXUALITY 

175 

going  on  in  emotions,  thoughts,  and  sensations. 
Sensations  tell  us  what  is  going  on  in  the  body. 
Therefore, what we experience is always going on in 
the field of consciousness itself, which is like an invis­
ible screen that is really located everywhere. 

Consciousness itself is unaware of what is  happen­
ing  within  itself. This  is  due  to  something infinitely 
larger than even consciousness, which is the nature of 
awareness-that which  has  no  dimension  or locality. 
We  experience  experience  within  the  field  of  con­
sciousness  itself  in  handling  human  and  behaVioral. 
problems  and  in  understanding  human  behavior. We 
can address it directly by going to its experience with­
in consciousness because consciousness itself is more 
powerful and dominant. We  can handle problems that 
seem to be arising in the body by handling them on the 
level of consciousness and also on the level of mind. 

When  looking  at  human  experiences  and  events, 
we see that events are one thing, but how we choose 
to be with them is something else.We may not be able 
to determine, control, or choose the events that occur 
in our lives, but we can determine how we wish to be 
with  them. Therefore,  the  experience  of how  to  be 
with them is  perhaps more important than the events 
themselves. We  all know that when we are in a certain 
mood, a minor irritation may be trivial. However, when 
in another mood, that same event can be aggravating or 
even send us into a  rage. Therefore, how we contextu­
alize  events  brings  up  the  whole  concept  of energy 
fields. 

The  energy  field  or  the  position  from  which  we 
perceive a  situation, the way we are  holding our own 

176 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

existence, and the importance of all  events are arising 
out of the context created by our position.We will refer 
again  to the Map  of Consciousness, which shows the 
levels  of consciousness,  their  calibrations  relative  to 
their energy fields, and the power of each energy field 
calibrated mathematically.11tis gives us an understand­
ing  in  our  left-brain  way  of  comprehending  things. 
Each level has a direction of an energy field, either pos­
itive or negative.The emotions arise from these energy 
fields,  along  with a  way of viewing  the world  and of 
relating  to  that  which  is  greater  than  our  individual 
selves.The entire process is going on in consciousness. 
All  of  this  will  come  together  in  addressing  the 
question  of high-energy  sex, that which  arises  out of 
the heart, and our way of being in the world as  com­
pared to low-energy sex, which is localized in a physi­
cal experience about which society has had so much 
to say over the ages. It can be seen that man's conflict 
about sexuality is consequent to the energy field of his 
position  about  the  subject,  how  it  is  perceived,  and 
what  it  means.. Problems  are  best  solved  not  on  the 
level where they appear to occur but on the next level 
above them. 

We are not going to discuss philosophy but instead, 
clinical experience-that which we can verify through 
our own experience, through human experience-and 
look  at  it  from  a  level  that  is  above  the  problems. 
Problems  are  best  solved  by  transcending  them  and 
looking at them from a higher viewpoint.At the higher 
level,  the  problems  automatically  resolve  themselves 
because of that shift in point of view, or one might see 
there  was no  problem  at  all. We  are  going  to  look at 

SEXUALITY 

177 

what  appear  to  be  sexual  problems  that  are  actually 
arising from an energy field, and about which we can 
change our position. 

In  general, when  people  talk  about  sex, they  are 

referring to a type of experience, but they are also talk­
ing  considerably  about  an  energy  field,  the  one  that 
everybody  presumes  to  be  and  the  media  focus  on, 
called Desire. They are talking about a  certain percep­
tion or way of looking at things; a certain wantingness; 
the overcoming of frustration or lack; the withholding 
of this or the manipulation of that; the gratification of 
it or using it as  a trade in relationships; the allure, the 
price, and the value added to the allure; and, in general, 
they are talking about the physicality. Morality is related 
to physicality and the view or holding of sexuality from 
the physical level, or the lower energy field. 

There is the story what happened in the Garden of 
Eden. Man and woman were in a state of innocence in 
a  very high  nonlinear energy field  where  they ate  of 
the linear tree of knowledge, the tree of good and evil. 
They bought into a world of duality. In contrast, in the 
world of Love, there is no duality. In lOVingness, loving­
ness  just is. The heart does not say anything; the heart 
just 'knows'. The heart is with life. In eating of the tree 
of right and wrong, of good and evil, what happened? 
They  then  saw  themselves  as  mentalized  bodies  and 
came  down into  Guilt, which is  at the bottom of the 
scale. From a  high state of joy; a  state of lovingness; a 
state of innocent, inftnite being with life; from joy that 
is  beyond  right  and  wrong,  they  fell  into  a  field  in 
which  they  were  looking  at  the  body  as  an  identity. 
They  then  became  conscious  of its  naked  bodyness, 

178 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

and  out  of  that  arose  shame  and  mankind's  sexual 
problems. 

Whether it is an historical event or primarily merely 
allegorical is  immaterial. Psychologically, it is  an event 
that  has  happened  to  mankind, so  the  problems  that 
man has called sexual are really due to a point of view 
about  physicality  and  seeing  sexuality  as  a  physical 
phenomenon being run by desire. In contrast to desire 
is  aversion, so sexuality is then characterized by desir­
ingness, aversion, avoiding the field, wanting nothing to 
do with it, and taking the moralistic position that one 
is superior by seeing it as a physical, animal function. It 
even degrades that which is  termed 'animal,' calling it 
'carnal' as though the animal world, which was created 
by God, is  somehow immoral. Therefore, the difficulty 
is  not  in  sexuality  at  all,  but  constantly  within  con­
sciousness.The view is arising out of how, in conscious­
ness, the  mind  is  seeing  sexuality  and  defining  these 
relationships. 

In studying these fields  of consciousness, we have 
learned that the level called Courage is the energy field 
of 200;  the  arrow  is  neutral  and  no  longer  negative. 
Everything below 200 is  a position of victim and lack. 
Guilt, apathy, grief, fear, desire, anger, and pride all come 
from positions of lack, of not having wholeness, of not 
being at one with life. Holding sexuality from the phys­
icallevel of Desire (calibration level  125) and dividing 
it  according  to  gender into  maleness  and femaleness 
create  a  feeling  of separation.  Out  of that  separation 
comes craving; out of desire  comes frustration; out of 
frustration  come anger and resentment; and out of all 
that come fear, grief, and apathy. As  a result, people are 

SEXUALITY 

179 

prone to guilt about sexuality; some are also limited by 
apathy, hopelessness, and lack of desire; others associ­
ate sexuality with grief; and some are fearful. 

Frustration  is  associated  with  desiringness, wanti­
ngness, and then anger and pridefulness about sexuali­
ty.This is demonstrated by strutting one's macho image 
or sticking out one's feminine  attributes in a prideful, 
tantalizing, seductive kind of controlling, manipulating, 
and exploiting way, a la Hollywood. 

The marketing industry utilizes  this-the desiring­
ness, frustration,  lack,  and  feeling  of separation-and 
attempts to control and manipulate people. There is  a 
pretty girl sitting on the hood of a car, but what does a 
car have to do with a pretty girl? The advertisement is 
trying to connect the two. If I get this car, or shampoo, 
or hair-do, or if I  wear this  perfume, then I  will  over­
come  this  separation  between  me  and what I  desire. 
That point of view then creates an endless painfulness 
and  source  of  suffering. The  suffering  takes  various 
forms, such as  impotence, frigidity, sadism, or even vio­
lence. They arise from holding sexuality from the view 
of its  physicalness,  desiringness,  and  lustful  wanting­
ness. One can see why many people are run by that. 

Because of the nature of this energy field of Desire, 
the accompanying emotions are those of wantingness, 
greed, and cravingness, leading to an addiction to sex. 
Sexuality  runs  the  sexually  obsessed.  Sexual  obses­
sion/compulsion results  in the endless promiscuity of 
going  to bed with anyone who  is  available  and arises 
from the need to prove one's desirability. 

On the right side of the Map of Consciousness, one 
can see that the process going on in consciousness at 

180 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

this  energy  level  is  that  of  entrapment. Within  con­
sciousness  at  this  level,  once  a  person  wants  some­
thing, that wanting  begins  to  dominate. The  desiring­
ness and wantingness run the person. Temporary grati­
fication fails  to suffice because of the negativity of the 
field, and leads to endless frustration, wanting, and crav­
ing. There  is  no  completion, no feeling  of finality,  and 
no  feeling  of  happiness;  there  are  only  enslavement 
and sexual addiction. 

True  happiness  does not prevail until one reaches 

the higher energy fields; therefore, trying to find happi­
ness  through  the  endless  creation  of satisfaction  and 
the  cycling  of  desire  creates  frustration.  Frustration 
feels good when it is temporarily satisfied. It feels good 
when one stops banging one's  head against  the wall, 
but that is  not the same thing as happiness. The desir­
ingness and cravingness continue. It is  because of this 
physicality and the energy field that all the moral ques­
tions arise. 

Why do  religion  and  morality address  this kind of 
energy field, and why is it called 'carnal'? Lower-energy 
sexuality  is  held  in  mind  in  a  lower  viewpoint,  and 
therefore the whole question of morality then address­
es  itself to  that which is  carnal. Carnality arises  from 
looking down on one's animal nature instead of accept­
ing it, being happy with it, being grateful for it, and say­
ing it is  intrinsically beautiful when it is  not judged or 
held in a degrading manner. 

How does  one get  out of this cycle  to experience 
sexuality  from  a  much  different  energy field  and  get 
relief from  it?  How  does  one  let  go  of being 'at  the 
effect  of' or controlled  or dominated  by this  instinct 

SEXUALITY 

181 

and run by the repetitive recycling of it?  How can one 
view sexuality from a different energy field so that it is 
experienced as a totally positive experience?When it is 
held  and viewed  from  a  different  level  of conscious­
ness,  all  the  questions  and  problems  begin  to  disap­
pear. Then  there  are  no  such  things  as  manipulation, 
withholding, frustration, or being run by desire, danger, 
and resentment.There is no feeling of lack if the desire 
is not fulfilled. Desire creates the fear that it will not be 
fulfilled, or grief that is  has not been, or apathy, anger, 
frustration, or self-blame. 

The bottom of the Map  shows that guilt is  accom­
panied by self-hatred. Holding sexuality from this level 
links  to  a  view  of the  world  of sin  and  suffering,  of 
hopelessness and sadness. From a lower viewpoint, the 
whole subject of sexuality becomes frightening. 

Sex  becomes  competitive  when  it  is  used  in  a 
seductive manner, or.in a manipulative energy field  of 
competition. Used as  a  symbol of status, sexual attrac­
tion  becomes  an  illusory  'power'  symbol,  and  the 
adornment of the human also becomes a symbol of sta­
tus and another way of controlling, manipulating, and 
trying  to  influence  one's  sense  of self-worth. Worry, 
anxiety, shame, wantingness, and resentment arise from 
this  energy  field,  which  often  leads  to  hatred. Thus, 
there are stabbings, violent murders, and suicides based 
on the infatuation, seduction, and manipulation of one 
by another, along with the  triangulations  of the  situa­
tions  and  the  unconscious  exploitations  that  occur 
based  on  this  desiringness  and  attractiveness.  The 
denial  about  this  is  visible,  along with  the  contempt 
(e.g. ,'trollop', 'whore' ,'bitch' ,etc., or carnal rap music). 

182 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

There  is  also  pridefulness  about  sexual  morality, 
which is seen as contempt, denial, or religious conflict. 
Prideful  people  often  hold  all  sexuality  from  a  con­
temptuous  'looking  down  their  nose'  viewpoint  and 
see  anyone  who  indulges  in  that  kind  of activity  as 
being debased by a  low animal  nature. They presume 
that everyone else is run by it in the same way they are. 
People who hold contempt for sexuality are projecting 
their own way of being with it onto others and saying, 
"Aren't they carnal? Aren't they animal?" 

In contrast with such views, high-energy sex, with a 
different energy field and a different way of being with 
it,  then  transcends  all  these  problems-competition, 
frustration, fright, guilt, regret, worry, and anxiety. How 
can we imagine enjoying ourselves in a human endeavor 
that  is  taking  place  in  this  whole  energy  field  while 
secretly feeling that God is probably going to pUnish us 
for it because the view of God that emerges out of this 
field  is punitive? We  are certainly separated from Him, 
and if we get any enjoyment or happiness, very likely 
there is expectation or retaliation in the end. 

Some people cannot stand the intensity of this con­
flict between a driving biological urge, a psychological 
need, and religion, so they just avoid it altogether and 
via atheism, which just eliminates the guilt. They have 
to either let go of their view of God and religion, or let 
go of their sexuality. For some people, this is an impos­
sible  conflict to resolve, and many of them end up  as 
atheists  because  there  is  no  way for  them  to  handle 
their humanness and their views of God. 

How does one move out of being run by that con­
flict  in order to  experience these  experiences from a 

SEXUALITY 

183 

different energy field? We will contrast it with an energy 
field  of lovingness, with sexuality as  an expression  of 
lovingness, as  a  sense  of aliveness, and  of being with 
the  truth  of that  which  one  is.  In  order to  have  that 
kind of experience, one has to let go of the lower energy 
field in which sex is really experienced as a local phys­
ical phenomenon. Then there are all kinds of preoccu­
pation  with  anatomy,  such  as  men's  preoccupation 
with  their  fitness  as  a  sexual  partner,  and  women's 
focus on the physical attributes of the body. 

Along with the physicality, there are emotionality 
and sentimentality. Emotionality plus physicality is the 
expression  of  love-the  'mad,  passionate'  embrace 
and  the  expression  of the  emotionality  of wanting­
ness and desiringness. "Oh, how I want you! ""Oh, how 
I crave you! ''''Oh, how I must have you," and the thrill 
of all that is what the movies and the media often por­
tray. If one lets go of those perceptions, what kind of 
experience  is  possible?  What  kind  of  experience 
would  happen  if sex were  no  longer just local  or a 
negativity? How would it be perceived if it happened 
out of the heart, out of an energy field of 500, out of 
the  space  of being with  the  reality  and  the  truth  of 
that which one is? 

First, it is  necessary to talk about how to let go of 
this driven energy field, how to avoid being run by it, 
how to  experience  sex without  conflict, and  how to 
transcend the cravingness of this energy field that causes 
all  the  problems.  How  can  we  experience  it  from  a 
much higher level? 

There is a  technique  that has worked with weight 
problems, with pain, and with a great variety of illnesses. 

184 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

The basic principle works the same no matter what the 
situation  is. When  the  energy,  feeling,  expression,  or 
desire comes up, first, let go of labeling it or calling it 
anything. Let  go of the fantasies, images, and pictures, 
and instead, allow the experience of what it is and the 
sensations of it to occur. By letting go of resisting them, 
they  progressively  diminish. The  solar  plexus  energy 
fields  of  desiringness,  cravingness,  and  wantingness 
eventually run out. 

When looking at wantingness, it is apparent that it 

is not really a  pleasurable bxperience. It is not pleas­
ant to  stand in front of the store window, looking at 
what is  inside  with  a  feeling  of wanting, desire, and 
frustrated craving. If we look at it and cancel the con­
tent of the 'what', whether it is diamonds, a fur coat, 
or  someone  else's  body,  we  realize  that  the  experi­
ence itself is  unpleasant. To  want and not have, espe­
cially  at  this  moment, is  unpleasant. To  want a  steak: 
and smell it cooking but not be able to eat it is really 
frustrating. If a  steak is  held in front  of a  dog's nose 
and he is  not allowed to eat it, what is he experienc­
ing?  Is  he  experiencing  happiness?  Is  he  glad  to  be 
alive?  If this continues long enough, the dog will end 
up with anger and rage at the frustration of his desir­
ingness. It is not a  pleasant feeling. 

The illusion is that it is the desire itself that brings 

sex into our life.Actually, the opposite is true.The want­
ingness and desiringness are blocking sex from coming 
into our life, as well as the full enjoyment of it when it 
is present. With the letting go of resisting this craving, 
all  the  desiringess  that  has  been  repressed  and  sup­
pressed comes  up. If it  is  allowed  t{)  just be  released 

SEXUALITY 

185 

and  flow  without  doing  anything  about  it,  without 
opposing or resisting the experience of it, it begins to 
decompress.  Eventually,  because  there  is  a  limited 
quantity of it, it finally stops altogether. When the crav­
ingness,  desiringness,  obsession,  compulsion,  and 
addiction  to  the  wantingness  and  cravingness  of this 
physicality dissipate, we are at peace. What a shocking 
thought! Where  there were  desiringness, cravingness, 
wantingness, and frustration; where there was a feeling 
of  lack,  of  'not  havingness,'  and  of  low  self-esteem 
because  this  was  not  being  gratified,  there  is  now 
instead a state of peace. 

The same thing happens when we let go of resist­
ing food  cravings and the desire and appetite for food 
all  the  time. That  greediness  finally  lets  go. These  are 
merely varieties  of greed. There  can be greed for  any 
external thing. What the world calls  sexuality is  often 
really  a  greediness, a  wantingness, a  forever  desiring­
ness that runs and dominates people and their lives. 

Instead of that, there is an inner state of peace and 
serenity. It  is  as  though the whole  question  has been 
handled and is no longer a problem. What is the prob­
lem now? There is  no problem. It no longer drives  us 
crazy or ins1.ilts  our integrity or us. We  no longer have 
to sell ourself out or feel that we have to barter or trade 
our body or our sexual expression in the endless bar­
gaining that goes on between men and women. There 
is no longer the tantalizing with it, the Withholding, the 
gift of it, the "Now you owe me," or the "Now you have 
paid me," or the "I  have paid for your dinner, now give 
me  your  body:' The  endless  trade-offs  and  bargaining 
come to  an end. We  are  now free  of manipulation by 

186 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that. Remember that when we manipulate  others, we 
are equally manipul~ted in return. 

When we let go of manipulating through this vari­
ety of sexuality, it means that we cannot be manipulated 
by it either. We  become freer once we are  unattached 
and move into the field of facing and coping with this 
problem. When we face  and cope with it, we become 
unattached and released instead of entrapped. 

What is  the  released  state?  It means  to be  so  free 
that if something happens in our life, it is terrific, and if 
it does not happen, it is  okay also. To be free  means to 
be at the level of choice. Then we are  not run by the 
world or manipulation. Every billboard does not send 
us  to the  store  to  buy cheWing  gum or whatever the 
pretty girl is selling.Willingness to transcend limitation 
moves us  up to acceptance  and allows  us  to feel  ade­
quate  and  confident. Feeling  adequate  arises  from  an 
inner  knowing  that  somehow  a  question  has  fmally 
been answered by life. 

Where there was frustration, there is now freedom, 
and with it  the feeling  of being adequate  as  a  human 
being and having far more confidence.There is the will­
ingness to begin to move into a lovingness. The world 
begins to seem friendlier. If sex is desired and frustrated, 
it hardly looks like a friendly world. Upon surrendering 
desire  and its  associated mental images  and fantasies, 
the  world  begins  to  look  more  friendly  and  harmo­
nious, allowing the freedom to enjoy the opportunities 
for sexual expression. 

As we move out of desire to acceptance, we move 

into an energy field where we begin to approach hap­
piness. There  is  the  beginning  of  happiness  and  a 

SEXUALITY 

187 

sense  of  mellowness  and  feeling  really  good  about 
our behavior and ourself. This lovingness is the begin­
ning  of nurturance to support the willingness to for­
give. There  is  the  capacity  to  experience  our  being 
with  this  field  of behavior from  a  different  point  of 
view. The energy field  then resolves all  the problems 
that arise in the lower energy fields. 

As  said  previously,  everything  is  experienced  in 
consciousness.  For  example,  if  our  consciousness 
were colored blue, then everything would be experi­
enced as blueness. If our consciousness were colored 
pink:,  then  all  of  our  experiences  would  be  experi­
enced as pinkness. Likewise, negativity also colors the 
entire experience of our sexual life. Coming from lack 
is  characteristic  of  lower  energy  fields;  therefore, 
everything  is  experienced  as  giving  and  getting. 
Wanting means the exchange of giving and getting, so 
we  hear expressions  about  sexual life  by adolescent 
boys when they get together in the locker room, such 
as, "Did you get any last night?" 

As  we move  up out of the lower energy fields  of 
giving  and  getting, there  appears  the  middle  energy 
field  of 'doing.'  In  this  case  people  are  preoccupied 
with the doingness of sex. "Let's 'do' it" is the expres­
sion. Therefore,  the  style  of 'doing  it'  becomes  the 
preoccupation. As  a  result, there  are  the  endless  sex 
manuals that talk about doingness. Some of the more 
modern ones  even throw in some love. That is  often 
considered to be just romanticism and something that 
women require to have happy sex. 

The energy field  of doingness has to do with how 
well one 'does' it. As  a  result, people become anxious 

188 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

about their performance. If sex is  something we 'do', 
then  we  should  do  it  well  in  our  society. Therefore, 
there  is  the  whole  idea  of competitiveness  and  per­
formance. Out of performance  anxiety come frigidity, 
lack of desire, and various forms of impotence in which 
there  is  the  anxiety  about 'doing  it'. "Will  he  like  the 
way I do it?" "Will she like the way I do it?" "Have I sat­
isfied  the  other person?" It  becomes  somewhat  rede­
fined as  a form of athletics. 

Eventually, sexuality becomes a way of how to  be 
with  someone. It  is  a  way of sharing  our being with 
that person. It is not what we give and get; it is not how 
we perform as though it were a rating scale. Instead, it 
becomes a way of being with the person in which the 
whole barter system falls away.When no longer viewed 
from a lower position, the whole question of guilt falls 
and  disappears,  and  the  moralistic  questions  are 
answered. Lovingness  means  a  connection within the 
heart, the  opening up  of a  space  and  a  way of being 
with that person. 

The fear arises that if we let go of our desiringness 
and  wantingness,  it  will  mean  that  it  will  disappear 
from our life. Research, experience, and clinical experi­
ence show that the opposite is  true. Desiringness and 
wantingness  set up  a  resistance. That which we want 
and desire also sets up a resistance in the other person. 
When  a  salesman  addresses  people  in  his· salesman 
style, the people know he is going to want to sell some­
thing.When we get that he wants to sell us something, 
resistance  comes  up  that  counterbalances  what  is 
going on in the lower energy fields. 

Surrender of wantingness creates the space for the 

SEXUALITY 

189 

energy field of life itself to enter the body and open up 
the  heart. The  letting  go  of  the  lower  energy  field 
opens the way for  the higher energy field  to  express 
itself througl;J. the opening up of joy, joyfulness, and lov­
ingness. There is  then the desire in the relationship to 
bring happiness and pleasure and to support the other 
person's experience. There is  compassion in lovemak­
ing. There  is  no  longer  worry  about  performance  or 
morality. From the energy field of lovingness, the loving 
of sex replaces the desiring and wanting it. 

Love is  nonjudgmental. It is  aware of intrinsic inno­
cence  and  naturalness. It  now watches  even  the  ani­
mals from a different viewpoint, seeing the expression 
of the  grace  of the  animalness. When  relieved  of the 
negative, condemning, moralistic energy field, it is pos­
sible  to  experience  the  incredible  beauty, perfection, 
and,  indeed, the  sacredness  of the  expression  of our 
aliveness-the thrill, joy, and experience of the energy 
field of our aliveness. It is experienced as the sexuality 
of love and the love of sexuality as an expression of love. 
In  contrast,  desiringness  seems  to  bring  with  it  a 
whole energy field that includes guilt, apathy, or grief, 
and  then  frustration,  fear,  anger,  pridefulness,  and 
anxiety  about  performance. When we  are  free  of the 
cravingness  of desire, we are then released from  guilt 
and remorse, from  anticipating that  maybe  it will  not 
happen, and from  all  these  energies  that  arise  almost 
en masse, almost as  a unit. With maturity, the integrity 
of  the  relationship  becomes  progressively  more 
important, with increasing appreciation for the other 
person's happiness. 

At  lower  levels  of  consciousness,  people  do  not 

190 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

experience the other person's energy; they experience 
their own energy. Sexual attractiveness, as amazing as it 
may seem, does not originate  in the outer world. It is 
something  that  one  projects  onto  the  world.  In  one 
society, being  extremely slim  is  attractive. In  another 
society, being plump is attractive, or being brunette or 
blond, or having  a  bone through one's nose, or many 
rings  around  one's  neck, or ear lobes  that  are  pulled 
long, or symbols painted on one's head, or hair piled 
up. All  these  kinds of decorations of the human body 
are only projections of one's own images that are being 
held within. People are the source of their own sexuality. 
Out of lovingness emerges the desire to experience 

the other person's energy. In that clear space, masculin­
ity and femininity are mutually attractive. It is as though 
universal man is  with  universal  woman, transcending 
the personality. Instead of a  localized physical  experi­
ence, now there  are  quite  different feelings  of expan­
siveness  and oneness that arise  out of being with the 
energy of that other person. Perhaps a  second before, 
there was no thought of sex in the mind of either one. 
The couple is waiting for the toast to pop up out of the 
toaster. Then there is an embrace that is done in a field 
that is clear. In other words, the partners have let go of 
any  withholds,  resentments,  or  things  that  were 
obstructing  their  being  with  each  other.  Out  of the 
embrace itself arises the desire that is  now of a totally 
different nature. It is the desire to be with and experi­
ence that person and their energy.The spontaneity of it 
arises  not out of desiringness  but out of the  space of 
the  essential  aliveness  and  energy  of being  with  the 
other  person.  It is  a  diffuse,  overall  experience,  and 

SEXUALITY 

191 

there is  joy and gratefulness for the opportunity to be 
with  that  energy. The  high  joy  and  pleasure  of  that 
brings a sense of allness of completeness. 

At the very moment that this desiringness arises in 
this  type  of energy field,  it  is  already  simultaneously 
complete.  For  example,  if the  phone  rings  and  the 
whole setting is interrupted, it can be dropped instantly 
with  no  feeling  of  loss. There  is  no  feeling  of  loss 
because the sense of completion within the heart-the 
oneness,  the  unification-has  already  occurred. 
Wonderful phenomena happen in life  when we let go 
of being run by any particular appetite.When that hap­
pens, it is as though the experience is complete at any 
moment, at all times. 

With weight  reduction, if we  let  go  of and  disap­
pear the hungriness, the wanting of food, and  being 
run by hunger, the sense of wanting and desiring to eat 
now arises  out of the eating itself. When we sit down 
to eat, there is still no feeling of hunger or appetite, but 
as we begin to eat, the enjoyment is enormous. If, how­
ever, the doorbell rings right in the middle of eating a 
steak, we can leave the meal and go to be with a friend 
without a  feeling  of loss  or lack. It  is  as  though  the 
completion  accompanies  the  enjoyment.  Instead  of 
coming from  a wantingness, it is  almost as though we 
are just this side of the experience and trying to push 
to the next second. We  know how that is  in sex, how 
that is  in eating-we are  always  anticipating the next 
bite, the next sensation.We are always anticipating. It is 
like  we  are  reaching,  so  there  is  always  an  internal 
stream  between what  is  happening  right  this  second 
and what we desire, want, and crave to happen in the 

192 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

next second. 

When wanting, craving, and desiring are  released, 
there  emerges  the  feeling  of  being  with  the  exact 
moment so that each moment is complete and total in 
itself. Because  of its completeness, it can be stopped 
at any second with no feeling  of loss. In a very high­
energy state of joyfulness and blissfulness, there is no 
feeling  of loss.  Someone  can  turn  off the  television 
program  we  are  watching without  a  feeling  of loss. 
That is because we are experiencing, without control 
of  anticipation.  The  nature  of  experiencing  arises 
from completeness in every moment. To  be with that 
person  now, to  feel  at one with their energy, to  feel 
acceptance, to  feel  the  aliveness  of that  oneness, is 
already  complete  at  the  very  moment  of its  experi­
ence.There is no 'have to' to continue the experience 
as  a  consequence  of  projecting  completion  in  the 
anticipated  future. The  pleasure  of eating  is  perfect 
without the anticipation of the next bite. In the energy 
fields  of lower  consciousness, life  is  experienced  as 
going from incomplete to complete. In the higher levels 
of consciousness, life moves from complete to complete. 
. The  letting  go  of desiringness  allows  the  experi­
ence to be completely a state of oneness and content­
ment. Each moment seems to be arising spontaneously 
of its own. Within the embrace, the experience is  hap­
pening spontaneously. It is like we are a participant in 
the  unfolding  of a  movie. This  happens  because  one 
has  owned oneself back as  source. Instead of putting 
the experience outside of ourself as  something to get, 
we have  owned it as  something that we are. It is  our 
way of being with that way about ourself. The experi­

SEXUALITY 

193 

ence  comes  from  within;  therefore,  there  is  no  gap 
between what we are and the experience. 

From a lower energy field, we experience ourselves 
as  separately 'here', and  that which is  desired  is  over 
'there' .The desire is then pictured as somehow coming 
across, reducing the distance and the space, but there 
is  always that feeling of space between what we think: 
we are and what we want. Our desiringness and what 
we want are  dualistically separated as  the subject and 
the  object. As  we  let go  and  become free  of that, we 
then begin to experience life  as  spontaneously unfold­
ing  of its  own. We  begin  to  have  reverence  for  the 
nature  of this  experience.  It  becomes  like  the  state 
described by the mystics. 

What is a mystic? It is a person who has really let go 
of that desiringness and is  experiencing completeness 
and totality from  second to second, and within it, the 
exquisite  beauty, reverence, and  sacredness. Now  the 
relationship  becomes  an  expression  of that  which  is 
sacred,  and  there  is  the  enjoyment  of the  exquisite 
sense of aliveness. It is as though we have transcended 
the world. How has it done that?  It could be said that 
the  world  is  that  which  is  constantly  changing,  that 
which begins and ends, that which is limited, and that 
which limits us. If we identify with it, it then limits our 
experience to that local wanting and craving. If we let 
go  of that, then the  energy field  that begins  to  come 
through the heart and unite us with that other person 
in this spontaneous joyfulness means that we have really 
transcended  the  world  because  now  the  energy that 
we are experiencing is infinite. 

Experientially, the sexual experience now expands. 

194 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Instead of a local genital phenomenon, the experience 
expands  throughout  the  entire  body.  From the  entire 
body, it now begins to expand into a space around the 
body.  It  seems  like  the  whole  room  is  having  an 
orgasm. It seems  as  though  some  kind  of an  infmite 
space  is  the  source, and  the  body  is  merely what is 
happening  in  that  space. The  body becomes  like  the 
marionette  that  is  acting  out what  is  going  on  in  an 
invisible realm that is infmite.The energy being experi­
enced is unlimited because love is unlimited. 

If we look around, we see the expression of loving­
ness everywhere. It has no beginning and no end. It has 
no limitation.The only thing that limits it is our willing­
ness  to  experience  it  and  be  open to  it.  It is  like  an 
infinite ocean, so when we become open to it by letting 
go of that which opposes it, we become an expression 
of that lovingness. It is  then experienced as an infmite 
space  that  transcends  the  personality as  well  as  time 
and space. 

The greatest aphrodisiac is that inner sense of alive­
ness, and as that aliveness intensifies, it is as  though it 
awakens the totality of all of us. That feeling  of loving­
ness and goodness is the greatest aphrodisiac of all. We 
are  talking about the eroticism of the heart instead of 
the sexuality of the body.The heart is all encompassing, 
diffuse,  and  all  inclusive,  and  it  generates  an  intense 
sense  of aliveness. There  is  that  exquisite  pleasure  in 
the  experience  of our own existence  expressed now 
within the energy field  of being with someone whose 
energy matches, yet  is  its  polar  opposite. This  allows 
the man to experience his own feminine side. He then 
owns it in the experience of the embrace. The woman 

SEXUALITY 

195 

experiences  his  energy  field  within  herself,  coming 
back to her through the man, and there is that sense of 
oneness  and  completeness  in  the  magic  of  that 
embrace. The magic is the joining of these two energy 
fields, the masculine and the feminine, as an expression 
of their oneness out of that intense feeling of aliveness 
and joy. 

Recontextualization settles the problems that man 
has talked about having to do with sexuality because, 
in the  subtlety of that  inner experience  is  the recon­
nection with the joy of our innocence.The whole ques­
tion of whether God approves of sex disappears. 

In the  experience  of that  aliveness,  oneness, and 
joy, as one moves up to an infinite state of inner peace 
and  completion  (because  completion  is  peace),  it  is 
found that peace is that sense of absolute oneness and 
the  rejoining  with  oneness. Within  the  sexuality  that 
arises out of the heart is  the return to the experience 
of being complete. It is the mystical quality of transcen­
dence, a sense of unlimited everywhereness. 

When that sense of oneness occurs, it is as though 
we transcend all of time, as if we have been all of men 
forever and all of women forever. We own the source; 
we are that out of which the experience arises.We are 
no longer at the effect of it but the expression of it, 
with its incredible sacredness and beauty.There is the 
subtlety of that inner experience as we look ~ithin. 

How  can  this  be  made  practical?  Does  it  sound 
like  fantasy,  like  the  mystical  or the  unreal?  Does  it 
sound  mythical, perhaps, and  not  really  of men and 
women? .There  are  certain  practical  ways  in  which 
one can move into it.A way to unfocus from the local­

196 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ized physicality of the body arises out of the ancient 
traditional  meditative  technique  of  focusing  your 
attention on the pOint one inch below your navel and 
keeping it there throughout the entire experience. Just 
try it. That is  a  point the Japanese call  the 'hara'. It  is 
used in martial arts where one's foc'us or centeredness 
is. Instead of paying attention to the movements of the 
body, the manipulations, and the endless anxieties, con­
centrate  and  fix  the  attention  on that  spot  one  inch 
below the navel. Hold your attention there no matter 
what is happening, and you will fmd that you are some­
what  removed  now.  In  this  state,  one  becomes  the 
autonomous  participant/observer. The  entire  experi­
ence now takes  on a  whole  different  dimension. It  is 
now spontaneously happening within you, but instead 
of being focused on the local, you are now experienc­
ing from a  more generalized energy field. Try this as  a 
way to move from  that local experience on up to the 
heart.Just move into that point called ohara' and notice 
the change in the quality of the experience. 

When we move  out of the localization, we move 
into a  different energy field. The entire experience is 
then  one  of  expansion,  an  expanded  experience 
much  greater  in  intensity,  much  more  fulfIlling  and 
gratifying,  subsequent  to  which  we  feel  joyful  and 
grateful  instead  of  satisfied. The  difference  is  grati­
tude, which is akin to joy. Instead of the satisfaction of 
desire, which often leaves people with a sense of loss, 
there is sadness.Why does it leave one with a sense of 
sadness, loss, incompletion, and lack? It is the result of 
putting  the  source  of our  sexuality  out  there  some­
place  in the world instead of re-owning  it as  part of 

SEXUALITY 

that which we are. The sense of innocence that arises 
then puts us  back in the  Garden of Eden as  though 
we have  not eaten the  apple  from  the tree  of good 
and evil. It is  as though it takes us out of the field of 
carnality  and  puts  us  back  into  the  field  of  inno­
cence and the awareness of the truth of that which 
we  truly  are. It  is,  therefore,  one  of the  greatest  of 
human experiences. 

This demonstrates the principle that it  is  not the 

events of life  or what is happening but how we con­
textualize  them  that  determines  the  nature  of  the 
experience, whether it is a guilt-inducing, frustrating, 
anxiety-provoking, neurotic type of dysfunction, or it 
is  one of the greatest human experiences. 

CHAPTER  7 

The Aging Process 

How  does  the  relationship  between  body,  mind,  and 
spirit correlate with the  aging process? We  will learn 
how to identify with the aspect of ourselves that is real 
and to let go of those identifications with that which is 
unreal. 

Where is  it that a human experiences experience? 
When  our research  addressed that area, it was found 
that we are not subject to many things that the world 
holds to be inevitable. 

Aging  is  a  series of identifications as well as  pro­
grams,  stereotypes,  behavioral  patterns,  and  scripts. 
That  which  experiences  life  has  no  age  and  is  not 
subject to aging.We have to ask ourselves ifwe are that 
which  we  are  experiencing  or if we  are  the  experi­
encers. There  are  the middle-age  myths, health pat­
terns,  sexual  patterns,  and  weight  problems  that 
supposedly occur in middle age to consider, as well as 
the  statement  that  the  body  does  what  the  mind 
believes, along with the physics relating to that. Several 
facts and ideas will be considered, such as the fact that 
the  body is  really the  effect and not the  cause and is 
subject to what one holds in mind.There is freedom of 
choice  to  elect  these  various  patterns. There  is  the 
adopting  of family  and  social  patterns  and  the  influ­
ence  they  have  on  one's  thoughts  and  beliefs  about 
longevity. 

Feeling that one's life is a contribution or a sharing 
makes  a  difference  and  is  of value. There  are  some 
hypnosis experiments to review; along with some odd 

199 

200 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

things that have occurred in science, including a  clini­
cal  example  called 'progeria', and what that means to 
us.Aging will be considered asa class phenomenon.We 
will also  look at sex and age. The whole field of aging 
preoccupies everyone as they grow older, and the facts 
and fantasies  can be examined and redefmed utilizing 
the knowledge of the nature of consciousness itself. 

The Map of Consciousness again provides an orien­

tation  to  the  subject  of human  behavior  and 'who  I 
am' .To review, the chart is a numerical model showing 
the relative strengths, directions of the energy fields of 
the  levels  of consciousness, and  their relative  power, 
starting with death at zero and Bliss  at 600, for exam­
pie. Apathy at  50  is weaker than fear  at  100. Fear has 
much less energy than that of Courage at 200. 

At  Neutral, everything  is  okay yet  has  less  energy 
than  Love  at  500. Below the  level  of Courage, or the 
capacity to tell the truth, all  the energy fields  are in a 
negative  direction,  and  above  this  critical  level,  all 
the energy fields go upward. In other words, positive 
energy fields are those that nurture, support, and value 
life, and hold it as sacred. 

The energy fields below 200 are opposed to life, do 
not support life, and in fact, at the bottom of the chart, 
they become very destructive. Loss  of energy, loss  of 
spirit,  deflation,  entrapment,  inflation,  and  expansion 
are  all  negative· processes  and  lead  to  viewing  the 
world in a  negative way. They also lead to seeing God 
in a very negative way or even denying Divinity. 

It is  necessary to  restate the relationship  between 
body,  mind,  and  spirit  to  see  what  this  really  means 
because  it  is  very  important  in  looking  at  the  aging 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

201 

process. It  is  necessary  to  know  and  realize  through 
one's inner reflection and contemplation that the body 
is  unable to experience itself. This cannot be repeated 
too  often. The  body  has  no  capacity  to  experience 
itself. Knowledge about the body and what is going on 
with it arises from its sensations, but sensations in and 
of themselves  have  no  capacity  to  experience  them­
selves. That experience has to occur in something that 
is  greater than the body and its sensations, its sensory 
mechanism, and that is mind itself. It is because of mind 
that one is aware of what is going on within the sensa­
tions. The sensations  reveal what is  happening within 
the body. 

Mind alone, as curious as it may seem, has no capac­
ity to experience itself.A thought cannot experience its 
own thoughtness; a feeling cannot experience its own 
feelingness;  a  memory  cannot  experience  its  own 
memoryness. In order for  mind to  be  experienced, it 
has  to  be  experienced  by  something  that  is  greater 
than 
the  energy  field  of 
is 
Consciousness, which is  greater  than mind  and  more 
inclusive. 

itself,  and 

that 

Consciousness  itself,  and how we  know what we 
are  conscious of, comes from  an infinite field  with no 
limitations, which is called awareness. It is  because of 
awareness  that  we  know  what  is  going  on  in  con­
sciousness.  It  is  because  of  consciousness  that  we 
know what is  going on in mind. Because  of mind, we 
are aware of what is going on with sensations. Because 
of sensations, we are  aware  of what is  going  on with 
the body. Consequently, that which we are-that which 
is  aware, that which we really mean by the ultimate 'I' 

202 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

and the infmite Self, and that which is consciousness­
is  operationally  many  levels  removed  from  the  body. 
The  interesting  thing  is  that  the  body  expresses  ~nd 
does what the minds holds. One is subject to what the 
mind  believes. In other words, the  body,  being  like  a 
puppet, is  controlled  by  mind,  both  consciously  and 
unconsciously. Few people realize  the power of mind 
, 
overbod~ 
When looking at the Map of Consciousness, we can 
see that the physical body has a relative energy of 200 
(the same as the earth).The levels of mind are energies 
up to and including the 400s. 

The energy field of the body is neutral-:-it is neither 
positive nor negative. In looking at the physics of it, a 
thought held in mind from an energy field of 400 then 
dominates the body, which has an energy field  of only 
200. Consequently, the beliefs, ideas, thoughts, configu­
rations, patterns, and scripts that are held in mind are 
adopted by the body and begin to reflect in the body's 
physical  appearance. This  has  been  covered  in  our 
discussions on health, illness, and giving up the various 
diseases.This principle is important to consider further. 
Later  in  this  chapter  are  physical  examples  and 
ways  to  verify  the  principle  for  oneself, for  example, 
how to undo the middle-age myth, the whole of idea of 
decrepit  old  age,  the  idea  of  failing  health,  and  the 
belief system  that  all  these  things  are  inevitable  and 
must be part and parcel of the body process itself, little 
realizing that they are actually coming from mind. This 
can be  demonstrated with very simple  clinical  exam­
ples, such as hypnosis. 

In hypnosis, for instance, an old person who is quite 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

203 

feeble  walks  into the  office  and says, "Would you like 
me to sit here? Can I sit in this chair here?" And he sits 
down as  though he barely has the strength and power 
to sit  in the chair. Then he is  put under hypnosis  and 
told  that  he  is  thirty-five  years  old. Then  amnesia  is 
induced so he will not remember what the suggestion 
was. When  awakened  from  the  hypnotic  state,  he  is 
asked,  "Would  you  like  a  glass  of  water?"  and  he 
answers, "Yes,  I  would like  a  glass  of water."  He  then 
walks  over  to  the  fountain,  takes  a  glass,  fills  it,  sits 
down, and the feeble old man is gone.Where are all the 
shaking  and  the  trembling?  Where  are  the  weakness 
and decrepitude? What has happened to the feeble old 
man? He seems to have disappeared! 

Through this  clinical  example, it  can be  seen that 
through the hypnotic state, the body is reflecting exactly 
what the mind believes-the way it stands, the way it 
holds  itself, and  its  attitude  toward  the  body. The  old 
man is  looking  at  the  body as  though  it  is  frail.  He  is 
preoccupied with the  thought  that  he  might fall  and 
break his  hip.As  a  result, holding  that  in mind might 
bring it into his life experience. 

Another example is  in the case of the multiple per­
sonality where one of the personalities has totally dif­
ferent views about health, life, and aging than the other 
one has.The body reflects the beliefs of the personality 
that is dominant at the time. If one personality believes 
in asthma while in the body, the body literally has asth­
ma. But when that  personality  is  replaced  by a  more 
pleasant personality that does not have abelief in psy­
chosomatic  illnesses,  then  the  asthma  is  not  present 
and  the  person  has  no  allergies.  Consequently,  the 

204 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

physical body reflects one's unconscious belief systems 
as well. 

In  looking  at  how  these  belief  systems  arise,  the 
. mind fIrst  erroneously concludes that it does not have 
any  options  and  thus  thinks  it  is  at  the  effect  of the 
body  and  the  ongoingness  of time.  In  this  case,  the 
mind is  giving  away  its  power to  the  calendar. It pic­
tures that the body must of necessity get older as  the 
years go by. 

A very  interesting  clinical  example  is  'progeria', a 
genetic  condition  in which  the  person  progressively 
ages and becomes an extremely old, old person by the 
age of fIve, six, seven, eight, and nine years, and is often 
dead by the age of ten from  literally decrepit old age. 
Death can actually occur from old age in a span of only 
ten calendar years. 

If calendar years were the cause and the physical 
body was at the effect of the calendar, no such thing 
could occur. This information is provided to begin to 
open the mind to see that there are options and that 
what we believe, buy into, and allow ourselves to be 
programmed  by  now  becomes  the  source,  the  pro­
gram,  and  the  script,  and  that  this  script  begins  to 
express  itself  on  the  physical  l~vel.  When  seeing  it 
occurring on the  physical level, the  mind, due to its 
naiVete, concludes that the cause is happening on the 
physical  level. The  naIve  mind  sees  causality  on  the 
physical  level  as  'A  causes  B  causes  C'  within  the 
physical  realm, the turning  of the  calendar, and the 
seasons. Thus, it  is  causing  the  aging  process  of the 
body on the physical level. 

In truth, something from  a  higher level  is  sequen­

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

205 

tially causing both A, B, and C. If we hold the concept 
in mind that goes A ... B ...  C, then within the physical 
world, we ftrst see A, then B, then C. Therefore, the left 
brain,  because  it thinks  linearly  and  projects  its  con­
cept onto  the  phenomena of the world, holds  that A 
must cause B must cause C. It never suspects that the 
causality ofABC  is simultaneously arising from a differ­
ent level altogether. 

The level of cause, where the power is, is  the level 
of mind. The  world  of  the  physical  is  the  world  of 
effect. It creates ABC. If we hold a  pattern in mind of 
what agmg looks like and  think that is  what must be 
and happen, we create on the physical level ABC-the 
decrepit  people-because  that  is  what  old  people 
looked like in our childhood. We  were convinced that 
is what someone looks like when they are eighty; thus 
we will look like that when we are eighty years old. If 
we were to look back into that person's mind and see 
their pictures of what an old man looks like, we would 
see  that  he  looks  exactly like  the  person  standing  in 
front of us because that was his picture of what it looks 
like to get old. 

An  experiment  demonstrating  what  the  mind 
believed  was  done  with  the  menstrual  periods  in 
women in which they were given an injection and told 
that it would result in their skipping  their next men­
strual period.They were given an injection of a placebo, 
and about eighty-ftve percent skipped the next period 
and about ftfteen percent experienced a lengthy delay 
in its onset. 

These examples are not exceptions. Our interest is 
in the basic principle, which is that this is  going on all 

206 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the time. The  mind continuously reflects  the  patterns 
and beliefs of what is being held in mind.These clinical 
examples from hypnosis and research experiments are 
merely isolated ones to demonstrate it clearly. We  can 
see that under hypnosis, the body will do exactly what 
the mind believes. For instance, a patient can be hypno­
tized  and  told  he  is  allergic  to  roses,  and  when  he 
wakes up, his nose will become stuffy. He will develop 
hay fever and have an asthma attack right there in the 
office.  This  experiment  has  historically  been  done 
many times and recorded in the annals of psychoanaly­
sis.This is always going on; now you can become aware 
of the constant programming affecting us.The expecta­
tions  of middle  and  old  age  and  what  they  are  sup­
posed to mean are  brought on by the mind out of its 
naIvete. 

As  mentioned  previously,  one  of the  basic  princi­
ples  of consciousness  itself is  its  intrinsic  innocence. 
Because the mind is innocent, we have to begin to care­
fully  watch  and  guard  it. We  have  to  become  like  its 
mother. The mind is  like  an innocent child who goes 
out  in  the  world  and  believes  everything  it  hears.  It 
believes  every billboard, every commercial, and every 
remark that people make. It believes what it sees. It has 
no way to evaluate  it and has  no  sense of discrimina­
tion. We  have to begin to take responSibility and say, "I 
can  see  that  my  mind  is  intrinsically  innocent,  and 
because the innocence of the mind of the child is  still 
with  me  throughout  life,  I  should  start  looking  into 
what it has been buying." 

In  looking  at  the  lives  of many  who  are  very 
creative,  one  can  see  that  they  characteristically  live 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

207 

well into  their  nineties, frequently  getting  married  at 
eighty-five, and even having children at ninety. Dr. John 
Diamond wrote  an  entire  chapter about that and the 
energy  of  life  in  one  of  his  books,  Behavioral 
Kinesiology. He studied the life patterns of those people 
who  were  devoted  to  classical  music  as  conductors, 
composers,  and  performers,  and  found  that  they  all 
characteristically  lived  and  remained  productive  to  a 
very old age. It is  accepted that  an  eighty-six-year-old 
conductor can lead a whole  symphony orchestra and 
have  a  thirty-four-year-old  wife  and  a  young  baby  at 
home. It is a somewhat accepted occurrence with that 
lifestyle.  Many  humorists  and  writers  live  to  very 
advanced  ages,  as  do  many  people  who  do  research 
and  study  physics.  Performers  such  as  George  Burns 
and Fred Astaire also lived long lives. 

In  other words,  the  numerical,  chronological  age 
has  no  power within  itself.  It  is  our beliefs  about  it, 
how we hold it in mind, and how we genuflect to all 
the  belief systems  that  go  with  it  and  that  we  have 
bought  into  throughout  the  years  that  have  power. 
How is it that some people are dancing and performing 
at  age  eighty,  and  other  people  at  age  fIfty-nine  are 
ready for the grave? 

I have a friend who, at age fIfty-nine, looks like he is 
seventy-five.  It  is  as  if life  is  all  over for  him.  He  has 
already had two coronary bypass operations. The way 
he  holds  himself-the weakness  and his  whole  body 
stance-shows what he believes old age must entail. 

The first thing to realize is that we have options.We 
can choose  to  be different and to let go of the  belief 
systems  in our family. We  can look back and  begin to 

208 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

find where the belief systems about middle age and the 
aging  process  came from. "What  constitutes them? We 
can look at our own childhood and see what the rela­
tionship was with our parents, and also look at the time 
when their parents were middle-aged."When looking at 
our  middle-aged  parents,  we  can  remember  the  pat­
tern, which can be seen like a photograph. 

To  some  people, middle  age  means  haVing  a  beer 
belly,  sitting  at  home  feeling  tired  and  discouraged, 
watching  television,  and  complaining  about  life  with 
remarks such as, "I  don't have the energy for that any­
more." Or getting  the thought, "Well, you are  over the 
hill,"  and  the  men  start  to  wink  at  each  other. "Hey, 
George,  what?  Are  you  a  little  over  the  hill  there?" 
meaning middle age and forgetting about a sex life.All 
these programs go into the impressionable mind of the 
naive  child who is  creating a  picture  of what mother 
looks like-tired and bedraggled. She  no longer cares 
for  her appearance  and does not bother going  to the 
beautician  anymore  because  middle  age  to  her  now 
means sort of retiring from life. 

Then we see people looking forward to retirement 
and their views of that, including retiring from life.The 
whole  attitude  is, "We'h  go  to  Sunset  Hills  now  and 
slowly wait for the sun to set.We'll join the old people's 
fadeout club, get progressively weaker, and watch each 
other go."  That  is  an  option. However, George  Bums 
did  not  buy that  option, nor  did Alan  Greenspan, or 
FredAstaire.Think of all the great composers and writ­
ers, the politicians, and the powers that run this world 
who  are  well  into  their  sixties,  seventies,  and  even 
eighties. As  they got  older, their  power, wisdom, and 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

209 

ability  in  the  world  grew  ever  stronger,  not  weaker. 
Look at all the thought systems and beliefs about what 
is  supposed  to  happen  to  the  body,  all  the  thoughts 
about what we think aging must entail. 

We  can  look  at  our pictures  and  the  relationship 
with  our  parents.  Did  we 
love  our  parents? 
Interestingly, that love can be the very reason for  that 
identification.  It  is  because  we  love  them  that  we 
pattern ourselves  after them. If we admire  our father 
who. then develops this middle-aged pattern, we identify 
with and pick up the pattern, not for negative reasons, 
but  out  of admiration,  innocence,  and  love  for  him, 
along with family loyalty. The  same is  true of the  rela­
tionship with grandparents.We get an idea of what old 
age looks like: 

Interestingly, I had a relatively negative view of mid­
dle age, but I also had a  relatively positive view of old 
age; therefore, I looked forward to that time. At age sev­
enty-six, my grandfather was up on the roof putting on 
a new one, and my other grandfather was dignified and 
elegant, so I looked forward to old age. That is the time 
when we can put on our spats and best hat, dress up in 
our best clothes, and live a really aristocratic, enjoyable 
life.  For  once, we can just be who we  really  are. It is 
going to be over before long, and therefore we do not 
have to cater to anybody any 10nger.We can really be an 
elegant and very loving, wonderful  person, so  to  me, 
old age was not something of a faltering decrepitude. It 
has been that way for other people, however, so we can 
see that there is  an option. It is about whom we love 
and identify with. It is all the programming that we got 
from television and the movies, along with the image of 

210 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

what  aging  means.  The  television  commercials  are 
designed to appeal to those fears of aging. 

Of  course, what  we  fear  we  hold  in  mind, and 
what we hold in mind tends to manifest, so the fears 
of old  age,  the  very things  we  begin  to  fear,  are  the 
very  things  that  begin  to  manifest.  It  is  helpful  to 
return to the realization that there is an option to not 
buy any of these pictures. Whatever picture is bought 
is  what is  going to manifest in our life; therefore, we 
have  to  be  careful  about  what  we  buy  into.  We 
become the  guardian of our mind. We  look at  it  and 
see  what  it  does  believe, and  then  we forgive  it  for 
what it picked up over the years. It did not know of 
its own innocence and therefore picked up all of the 
programs, stories, and scripts, and unwittingly, we find 
that we are beginning to act them out. 

If we  want  to  know what  life  scripts  we  bought 
into, all we have to do is look at our own life  and our 
physical  self. The  physical  self is  a  reflection  of what 
we have bought, and we may not even remember hav­
ing  done  so  due  to  amnesia  about  remarks  overhead 
throughout childhood. People look into their memory 
'and say, "I don't remember ever believing such a thing." 
Actually, we are unconscious most of our lives and have 
amnesia  about  most  of it  because  of the  millions  of 
things we do remember.What we do not realize is how 
many seconds there are in one day. Do you remember 
what happened each second of each day? We are lucky 
if we can remember what we had for breakfast yester­
day. Therefore, a great deal of what went on in our life 
is  operationally forgotten  in that it is  not available  for 
immediate  recall. In  looking  at  the  body, we  can  see 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

211 

what programs were picked up; what its belief systems 
were; what was thought to be valuable or loved, or its 
reverse;  and  what  it  feared  and  brought  about  into 
manifestation because the fear was being held in mind. 
The  patterns  of aging  also  follow  a  certain  class 
phenomenon, and in the picture of age and aging, there 
is increasing longevity. It is now very normal for people 
to  live  longer, and  even though they live  longer, they 
are energetic and functional into a very advanced age. 
They  see  old  age  as  a  time  of increased  stature  and 
value. This  can  be  contrasted  with  a  different  social 
view  where  power  and  value  come  out  of physical 
strength,  and  the  aging  patterns  are  more  rapid.  For 
example, in the area of sports, a participant at age thirty­
two is already considered old, and at forty is considered 
to be an old man in the field. When certain classes  of 
laboring people reach age sixty-five and retire, it is pret­
ty much over, and from  sixty-five  onward, there is  the 
pattern  of moving  into  Sunset Hills,  along  with  indo­
lence  and  the  loss  of energy,  interest  and  aliveness. 
There is  the giving up of life  as though retiring from a 
job means retiring from  life. It is  as  if the job was the 
only thing that gave meaning and value to life, and now 
that  the  person  is  no  longer  classified  as  a  'worker', 
they no longer have value in the world. 

There  is  the  failure  to  look  at  oneself in  a  more 
holistic,  total  way  and  see  value  as  something  other 
than productivity in the workforce and the capacity to 
bring home  a paycheck every Friday. There is  the fail­
ure  to  see  oneself  as  something  other  than  just  a 
prOVider, or just the mother of the children. 

In  women, the  pattern  of the  aging  process  does 

212 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

not  really  start  until  the  children  grow up  and  leave 
home. Suddenly, the mother joins  her husband in the 
pattern of retiring from life. The father retires from the 
job, and  the mother retires  from  raising  the  children. 
Both  of  them  are  now  unemployed,  with  lessened 
value in their own eyes.Although they make a few spo­
radic attempts at being of some use in society, they do 
not really  believe  it. Therefore, the  aging  process  can 
become progressively rapid and many people often die 
within a few years of retirement. 

It is important to look earlier in life and constantly 
. challenge  these  belief  systems  in  order  to  discover 
something  about  our  life  that  is  of such  value  that, 
whether we work, bring home  a  paycheck, raise  chil­
dren, or follow a traditional, solid middle-class-America 
way of life or not, life still has value, and we see that we 
.are making a difference in the world and that our life is 
significant. There  is  the  willingness  to  share  our  life 
with others, to be a source of enthusiasm, and to con­
tribute  to  the  lives  of  those  around  us. We  have  to 
reevaluate the worth of our life and recontextualize it, 
adopt a  different way of being with it, and view it dif­
ferently in order to give it a different value in our own 
eyes,  thereby  raising  our  own  energy  pattern  conse­
quent to a more positive way of looking at life. 

Previously we indicated that one is subject to what 
is  held  in  mind. We  can  identify  these  belief systems 
and  patterns  and  know  that  we  have  the  option  to 
change them. The  choice is  up to  each one of us. We 
can be very active  and vigorous  into  old age, we can 
have  a very significant  and valuable  life  that is  highly 
enjoyable, and our physical  health can continue right 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

213 

to the very end. 

Everybody has life-script fantasies  and looks at the 

advantages of different programs.That is one of the rea­
sons  we  choose  them.  It  is  necessary  to  look  at 
whether we are willing to let go of those that are not 
beneficial  fot  the  gain  and  benefit  that  we  would 
receive from doing so. 

Our life, our body, and what goes on in our life are 
projections of what we have been holding in our own 
mind. Over-experiencing is the projection of our own 
belief systems into the physical world.What we hold in 
mind  manifests,  and  we  have  a  choice  when we  see 
this pattern.We begin to realize that if what we experi­
ence is the result of what we hold in mind, then we can 
change  what  we  experience  by  changing  what  we 
hold in mind. 

We have to exchange the belief system we are hold­
ing for the truth that we are infinite beings and subject 
only  to  what  we  hold  in  mind.  Every  time  negative 
beliefs  come  up,  it  is  necessary  to  cancel  them  and 
insist  on  the  truth. The  collective  consciousness, the 
energy field  of the world, has  to  be  constantly coun­
tered because the world reprograms us with it again. It 
may  even  return  due  to  hearing  a  chance  remark. It 
requires vigilance to undo all the belief systems within 
the mind. 

The same thing happened with vision and glasses. I 
wore bifocal glasses  for  fifty years. Of course, there  is 
the belief system in our society that middle age brings 
about changes in vision. Many people start using read­
ing glasses  during middle  age, so when we think of a 
middle-aged  person,  we  see  them  wearing  reading 

214 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

glasses. The  people  in  magazines  for  retired  people 
almost always wear glasses. It  is  just presumed that by 
middle age, a person is going to need them. 

Well, I already had glasses because I had the image 
in my mind of the intellectual bookworm, which I was, 
as  wearing glasses. Part of the image of what I was as 
an  adolescent  included  wearing  glasses.  Of course, if 
we already wear glasses, it is presumed that our vision 
is  going  to get worse  by middle  age, and that we are 
going to need bifocals. By late middle age, we are cer­
tainly going to need trifocals. 

It  was during this trifocal stage that I was involved 

in this kind of research and study. One day I was shar­
ing with my class about all the physical illnesses that I 
had  let  go  of using  these  consciousness  techniques. 
There was probably a list of flfteen or twenty different 
diseases,  and  then  somebody  said,  "Well,  then,  how 
come you are still wearing glasses?" I said, "You know, I 
never thought of that." I never thought of the fact that 
the  eyeball  itself and  its  capacity  to  see-the whole 
mechanism of vision-would be another manifestation 
of my belief systems about it. 

I looked at the belief systems and began to cancel 
them, saying that I am an inflnite being who is not really 
subject to any limitations such as the belief that I need 
glasses. The process took six weeks, and I could hardly 
see anything during that time because I was not wear­
ing  my  glasses.  However,  I  never  put  the  glasses  on 
again,  and  during  that  six  weeks,  my  mobility  was 
somewhat limited by the inability to see anything more 
than a  couple of feet  in front  of me. I was myopic  as 
well as  farsighted, and I  also  had ,astigmatism. I  could 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

215 

not read anything, nor could I see anything distant. 

After about six weeks of constantly and consistently 

letting this go, I fmally  just surrendered to it and real­
ized that part of the technique is to let go of resisting 
what the belief system was. Then I  said, "Well, God, if 
I'm  never going  to  see  again, I  guess  I  am just  never 
going to see again."And then I just totally let it go, totally 
surrendering  it  to  a  higher  power. And  then  I  said, 
"Whatever your will is to be, I will agree to that." 

What is the will of God for us? The will of God for 
us  is  complete  and  total  happiness,  wholeness,  and 
oneness. After  surrendering to God's Will,  suddenly, in 
one  instant, the  vision  returned  and was  absolutely 
perfect after a lifetime of wearing glasses. 

It does not matter how long we have had a  belief 
system. The belief system that was present throughout 
my entire life and literally limited my vision was surren­
dered many years ago.This example is just a demonstra­
tion of the prinCiple involved, which we experience in 
the  level  of consciousness  itself. The  body is  a  reflec­
tion  of that  which  we  believe, so  if we  address  our­
selves  directly  to  those  belief  systems,  to  the  mind 
itself,  and  to  where  it  is  being  experienced, we  can 
undo belief systems. We  have that freedom and option. 
Returning  to  the  commonly  held  belief  systems 
about  middle  age,  aging,  and  old  age,  two  things  are 
occurring. There  are  the  belief  systems  about  what 
aging entails, and there is  our position or the way we 
feel  about  it. In truth, it  is  not  the  events in  life  that 
have  any  importance,  but  their  meaning  to  us.  The 
importance of a fact  or an event comes from  how we 
feel about it, which creates a context. It creates a way 

216 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

of being and decides in advance how we are going to 
feel about that event, decision, or fact. 

In referring  to  the  Map  of Consciousness, we  can 

see  there  are  various  energy fields  and levels  of con­
sciousness. The  bottom  of  the  chart  represents  the 
most  unconscious  level,  which  is  farthest  from  the 
truth and closest to death itself. At  the top, because of 
increasing  truth, there  is  an  alignment with  life, with 
truth, and with a sense of aliveness; in other words, we 
might say that at the top is God. 

Emotions reflect the energy field  of a positionality, 
and out of that comes  a  certain view of the world as 
well as the view of a certain kind of God in that world. 
At  the bottom of the Map  are  the levels  of the lowest 
energy,  which  lead  to  almost  passive  suicide.  Many 
deaths from old age are not due to old age at all but are 
forms  of passive suicide, the result of having given up 
out of hopelessness.There is  a sense of guilt, as though 
old age, its decrepitude, and illness are almost the pun­
ishment for one's sins or failures  in life. It is as though 
one deserves all this, and out of self-hatred, the person 
chooses destruction. They see their life  and the world 
as  the experience of sin and suffering. They really fear 
dying  because, out of their guilt, they picture  God as 
being very punitive. There is  a fear  of old age  as well, 
along with the view that it is  a process of destruction, 
which comes from  this  belief system in their life  that 
allows them to fall  into the domain of this destructive 
viewpoint. 

An energy field somewhat above but still very close 
to passive suicide is that of just allowing oneself to die 
by not caring enough about oneself. This is in the field 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

217 

ofApathy, with a calibrated level of 50. It is again a neg­
ative  attitude,  one  of  hopelessness  and  despair  in 
which there is  a loss of energy. In this view of old age, 
the  whole  situation  is  considered  hopeless.  It  is  as 
though the grim reaper-the skeleton riding on horse­
back  and  carrying  a  scythe-has  the  power over us, 
and  it  seems  that  old  age  and  all  its  conditions  and 
physical elements are hopeless.There is  a loss of energy 
with this view of the world. The loss  of energy means 
that, out of hopelessn~ss and despair, we do not have 
the  energy to  handle this  life. Therefore, we  see  the 
personal life  and life  in the world as  hopeless and see 
God as  uncaring. 

The next higher energy level from which to look at 
middle or old age is that of Grief.This is a very common 
view. There is  sadness  over middle  age  and seeing the 
absence of youth as  a great and terrible loss-the loss 
of vigor; the loss of one's sex life; the loss of one's phys­
ical  attractiveness  and  seductive  sexual  abilities;  and 
the  loss  of mental  acuity;  position, and  power in  the 
world. The  endless  grief  over  these  perceived  losses 
results  in  the  emotion  of regret,  where  one  looks  at 
middle  and advancing  age  as  decline. People  become 
dispirited  about  their  own  lives  and  life  in  general. 
There  is  sadness  at  middle  age. They look  at  life, the 
future, and progressive aging as sad. It seems as though 
God  is  ignoring  them  and  does  not  really  care  about 
the aging process. 

The next higher energy level is that of Fear, and that 
energy can be utilized in a  positive way. What people 
need  to  fear  are  the  consequences  of these  negative 
belief systems, not  old  age. The  danger  is  not  in  age 

218 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

itself but in the negative belief systems that they have 
been holding in consciousness. However, the ordinary 
person fears old age itself and is full of worry and anx­
iety. Grief has to do with the past, and Fear has to do 
with the future. The mind looks at old age out of fear 
and  holds  worry and  anxiety about  the  future; there­
fore,  the  world  and  the  whole  aging  process  look 
frightening. There  does  not seem to  be any  God they 
can rely on. 

Next  comes  Desire,  and  out  of  that,  the  intense 
craving  and wanting to change  all  this. One aspect of 
that is  becoming addicted to being young and seeing 
that life is where youth is. There is the resulting youth 
cult expressing its fear of old age in a frantic  desire to 
hang on to that youth. Some people are unable to age 
gracefully, as  expressed through inappropriate  behav­
ior, because of their inability to let go of the desire for 
youth  along  with  misidentifying  youth  as  life.  Life  is 
present throughout. The  same  energy of life  is  in the 
child as well as in the 'old' person. 

The next energy level is that ofAnger.There is anger 
at  the  thought  that one is  subject to, at  the  effect of, 
and victim of the whole progressive aging process, and 
that the  calendar has  power over one's life. These are 
all negative energy fields, and in practice, they are usu­
ally  mixed with  other levels. Rarely  is  there  just  one 
level. Anger  is  also  mixed  with  some  sadness,  some 
hopelessness, and some guilt, and all  of them tend to 
occur together. There  is  the  anger of old age  and the 
frustration  and  resentment  about  it.  People  hate  and 
resent the  aging  process  and  the loss  of youth. There 
are many young people who have not had good expe­

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

219 

dences with their grandparents and hate older people; 
they don't want to be around them. Out of anger is  a 
world of conflict and competitiorl, and the  projected 
anger of God leads to an unconscidus guilt and the fear 
that God will retaliate. 

Denial is another way to be about aging, refusing to 
see the options mentioned above, and holding a certain 
arrogance and inflated position about the process.This 
would be a totally negative positionality. 

All these things have more to do with the truth, and 
to begin looking at them would then allow people to 
move  out of these  negative  positions. They would be 
able  to  let go  of resisting  them, of being  attached  to 
them, of giving value to them. They could be released 
from these positions, thus allowing middle age and pro­
toplasmic  aging to start to look okay. The God of that 
kind of experience would be a God of freedom. There 
would be the freedom and willingness to see that per­
haps they are the source of what happens in their life. 
They might say they will agree with that because their 
intention now is to fmd out the truth about the aging 
process. Now, middle age, aging, and the world begin to 
look friendly.The God of such a world is promising and 
hopeful. 

In  moving  up  to  the  level  of Acceptance, people 
begin to re-own their power.The willingness to accept 
the truth now shifts the energy field  from negative to 
positive. The  truth is  that  we  are  the  source  of what 
happens to us in our life.We are the source by virtue of 
buying into and owning these belief systems; we bring 
them into our life. The truth is  that we have a  choice. 
The minute we see that there is a choice and begin to 

220 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

accept that, it all  begins to look harmonious. The God 
of such a universe begins to look merciful. 

We  can now move  into  a  condition  of lovingness 
and  begin  to  take  responsibility  for  really  loving 
ourself. We  can begin to nurture, support, and forgive 
ourself for falling  into these thought patterns. Why do 
people fall  into these thought patterns?  It is  done out 
of innocence and naIvete.We  think that that is the way 
it is; there is no thought to question it. People have not 
been so conscious or aware. It is  only by giving exam­
ples that one can say,"Wow, it looks like I have a choice 
here:' We  stop  saying, "Well,  it  must  be  that person's 
genetics:' Or, "If I were like that, I would be glad to be 
alive  at ninety, too." We  stop  excusing it  and begin to 
really accept that it is because of the patterns we have 
held in  life. This comes as  almost a  revelation to  us, a 
sudden opening of the mind. 

The way to avoid limitation is  to begin to have  an 
open mind and the willingness  to look at the options 
and  see  that  we  do  indeed  have  choices. Then  the 
world starts to look loving. We  now begin to love  the 
prospects because we begin to  see  the  advantages  of 
middle  age  and  old  age. There  are  many people who 
look  back  and  say,  "Frankly,  I  wouldn't  want  to  be 
young again. I mean I would hate the thought of going 
through the teens, the anxiety, the acne, the  unknow­
ingness, the  stumbling around, the  awkwardness, and 
the  endless  social  anxiety  and  self-consciousness.  I 
don't think I would care for the twenties, either, won­
dering what I am going to be in this world and having 
terrible  anxieties, such as, Will  I  make  it  through col­
lege? Then there  is  the  struggle  of the  thirties, when 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

221 

one is trying to establish a family and all those kinds of 
things." 

Instead of now saying that the past was better than 
the  present, one  begins  to  say, "Hey,  right  here, right 
now, in the present, I have some beautiful options:' It is 
like  the whole world suddenly opens up  anew. "I  can 
become reborn at age sixty, so why not?" 

As we move from a negative energy field into a pos­
itive  one, we  get  closer  and  closer  to  the  truth  and 
become  progressively  aware  that  we  are  the  experi­
encer, and that the phenomena which have been going 
on  through  life  have  not  really  affected  the  experi­
encer. It is  like  we are  the hardware  of the computer 
and the experiences are the software. The hardware is 
not affected by the software; that which experiences is 
unaffected by the experiencing, so that which we are 
has remained unaged. It is not subject to aging. 

The  inner  experiencer  has  been  unaware  that  a 

change  has  been going  on  in  the  body,  which  some­
times comes as a surprise. People look at us differently, 
and we wonder why. It is because that within, we have 
not experienced the passage of time. The real self, the 
true self, has not experienced anything such as  aging. 
No  such thing goes on within the truth of that which 
we are. This progressive  awareness increases our free­
dom of choice and the way we wish to be with ourself. 
We  realize,  for  instance,  that  sexuality  in  old  age 
does  not  decline  at all  but remains  active, very often 
until the very end of life. A personal friend  of mine, a 
world-famous person who was seventy-six, said that his 
sex life was better than it had ever been at any time in 
his  life;  and  that it had  improved to  a  quality  he  had 

222 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

never even thought of as  a  younger man. As  a  young 
man, he was interested in the calisthenics, the acrobat­
ics, and the performance, but as  an older person with 
more maturity and greater wisdom, he was interested 
in  the  greater  dimensions.  He  confided  that, at  age 
seventy-six, he had just discovered what sex was really 
all  about, that it was  incredible, and  that he was  just 
boggled  by the  quality  of it and what he  had  discov­
ered about it. 

That brings us to some of the belief systems that are 

so common in our society having to do with what hap­
pens  in  one's  sexual  being  at  the  time  of male  and 
female  menopause. There was a clinical experiment in 
which  a  group  of thirty women was  given  a  placebo 
injection and told it was a hormone that would bring 
their periods two weeks earlier.The result was that the 
whole  premenstrual  syndrome,with  the  bloating, 
weight gain, belching, abdominal pains  and colic-all 
the  things  the  various  women  complained  of­
occurred  two  weeks  early  because  they  all  held  in 
mind  that  it  would  happen. This  demonstrates  the 
intense  suggestibility, the whole belief in the premen­
strual syndrome, and the symptoms that are supposed 
to  go  with middle  age  in  both women  and  men. The 
belief of women in hot flashes  and all  the phenomena 
that are supposed to occur can be induced by hypno­
sis, which has  been demonstrated repeatedly. A young 
woman  is  put into  a  hypnotic  trance  and  told  she  is 
going through menopause. She  is  asked to report her 
symptoms, which are identical to the ones reported by 
women experiencing menopause.The menopausal syn­
drome varies from culture to culture, and from class to 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

223 

class within each culture, and what occurs  is  what is 
held  as  the  inevitable.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  mind 
holds the woman as  a victim. It is  as  though the mind 
says, "And  this  is  how it is." The  situation is  hopeless. 
She  can  only  give  in  to  it,  buy  into  it,  and  be  at  the 
effect of it, thereby giving away her power. 

There was the example of the middle-aged man and 
what is  supposed to  happen to him-the cold hands 
and feet, feeling  tired and discouraged, loss  of energy 
and libido, and the  occurrence  of the  middle-age  dis­
eases,  including  diverticulitis,  gout,  and  all  the  other 
things associated with that age group. 

All  these things are the consequences of the belief 
systems of a naIve mind. It is out of innocence that we 
buy  into  all  these  belief  systems.  By  accepting  our 
humanness, there  arise  compassion  and a  willingness 
to forgive  ourselves for what we bought into. It is  just 
that we did not.know any differently. 

The purpose of all  this  is  to  share  what has  been 
discovered-that we have an option, a choice, and that 
we are  not victims. The way to move out of that is  to 
choose  to move  up  out of the  bottom of the  Map  of 
Consciousness  and realize  that it is  not hopeless. Just 
by  education,  by  hearing  and  knowing  about  it,  we 
begin to realize  that life  is  not hopeless, yet the mind 
would also like to excuse its own responsibility. 

If we look at the Map of Consciousness now from a 
slightly  different  view,  people  at  the  lower  levels  of 
consciousness value life and rate themselves and others 
based on what they have. Because that is aligned with 
survival, 'havingness' is  important. A person's value  of 
himself and  others  is  based  on  what they 'have.' As 

224 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

certain people get progressively older, they cling more 
and  more  to  what  they  have  in  order  to  give  them­
selves a sense of value. There are certain subgroups in 
our culture in which havingness  is  predominant. It  is 
what  one  has  and  whether  they  have  more  millions 
than another person that really counts, and if they lose 
all their money, now they are out of that society. 

Moving  up  into  the  middle  range,  closer  to  the 
Truth and Courage, there  is  the energy field  that sees 
life  as  opportunity. It  is  the  part that  settled America 
and created all the big industries. There  is  a powerful 
energy center coming out of this level where it is what 
we  do  that  counts. Doingness  is  very  important, and 
what we do  is  seen as  cause. Since  we  are  important 
because  of  what  we  do,  there  is  therefore  a  great 
emphasis on doingness. We want to hold doingness as 
the  effect  rather  than  the  cause. What  we  do  comes 
from  what we  hold in mind, or the  belief pattern, so 
doingness is a result and not a cause. 

It  is  not  because  of  playing  tennis  that  we  are 
happy  and  healthy;  it  is  because  we  are  happy  and 
healthy that we express that joy of our aliveness in the 
form oftennis.Therefore, the doingness that is so impor­
tant begins to fade  out as  we move  and progresses  in 
our level of consciousness. 

As  we get closer to the awareness of what.we are, 
then it is who and what we are that become important. 
As we progress in life, it is what we have become.This 
is true in other cultural groups where it is what one is, 
what one has become, what one stands for in this, one's 
beingness. It is the beingness that counts, so spiritually 
sophisticated  groups  are  not  interested  in  or  care 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

225 

about what someone has. Everyone knows that 'having' 
is a result of doing, and if one wants to work harder and 
more  effectively,  it  will  bring  about  havingness. They 
know  that  doingness  is  just  a  matter  of  exercising 
options. Someone can join the Board of everything and 
run themselves ragged; therefore, doingness no longer 
has status or value. 

. 

True value results from what we have become and 

the principles by which we live.These include commit­
ting  ourself to the principle of becoming increasingly 
conscious  and  aware,  committing  to  spiritual  princi­
ples and those things that are universal and transcend 
the temporary, and, finally, identifying with the progres­
sive  awareness  of that  which  we  truly  are. With  this 
progressive  increase  in  consciousness,  we  are  no 
longer at the effect of the world. We  no longer need to 
'have'in order to realize the significance of our being­
ness. It is the awareness of that which we are. 

This  proVides  a  different  position  from  which  to 

view the body. We  can now look at what our relation­
ship is  with the body and see that it is  something we 
have,  not  something  we  are.  It  is  something  that 
belongs to us, and now we can begin to enjoy the body 
and see that we have an option. We  can look at it as  a 
fun thing that belongs to us and is  there for our enjoy­
ment. If we let go  of our identification with the body 
and realize  we  are  not the  body, we  see that we  are 
experiencing  the  body.  That  gives  us  options  and 
choices. We  can decide to enjoy it and see  that it sort 
of bounces  around  happily, doing  what it  does  with 
little effort. 

By  letting  go  of  all  our  negative  belief  systems 

226 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

about sickness, we can be willing to let go of all those 
things, and as we get older, we can enjoy a progressively 
healthier body. The body that I· enjoy now is consider­
ably healthier that it was thirty years ago.With progres­
sive  age, or what the world calls 'aging', the body has 
gotten  increasingly  better.  I  enjoyed  the  body  much 
more  at  age  sixty than I  did  at age  forty. The  body at 
forty was very tired because it had migraine headaches, 
ulcers,  diverticulitis,  colitis,  hemorrhoids,  swollen 
ankles, elevated cholesterol, and gout. I had to carry a 
cane around in the trunk of the car. So at age forty, the 
body was old. Now, at a much older age, I enjoy it greatly 
as  all  those  illnesses  are  gone. With  the  letting  go  of 
those belief systems and limitations have come the pro­
gressive enjoyment of the body and being able to see it 
now as something with which to express one's happi­
ness. 

If we  hold in mind that  the passage  of time auto­
matically  means  the  progressive  deterioration  of the 
body, then we are subject to that. If, on the other hand, 
we view time as this space that gives us the freedom to 
grow,  to  become  more  conscious,  and  to  become 
aware, then time becomes our friend. It is over the pas­
sage of time that these illnesses of the body of middle 
and old age  disappear. We  have  the time  in which to 
explore and to become aware that there are options for 
how we limit ourselves by belief systems. 

Recovery from many illnesses and personal human 
conditions  can  occur when  these  basic  premises  are 
consistently applied, but possibilities are limited by the 
general  circumstances  inherent  to  the  human  condi­
tion  itself. Thus, the human body is  protoplasmic  and 

THE  AGING  PROCESS 

227 

inherits  the  human  genome. Th~re  are  also  karmic 
influences  and  propensities  as  well  as  programs  that 
are  inherent  to  the  collective  consciousness  of 
mankind. 

CHAPTER  8 

Handling Major Crises 

All of us are beset by the major crises of life at one time 
or another, but how many of us know how to handle 
death,  divorce,  separation,  disfigurement,  injury,  acci­
dent, catastrophe, and those other serious events that 
result in emotional overwhelm? What techniques can 
be utilized to handle these experiences? 

We will refer again to the Map of Consciousness as 
a  point of reference  for greater understanding  of the 
question. This map is a mathematical model that repre­
sents  the  human  ego,  the  self  (with  a  small's'). 
Included  are  the  various  levels  of consciousness  and 
their names according to the common human experi­
ences of shame, guilt,  apathy, grief, fear,  desire,  anger, 
pride,  courage,  willingness,  acceptance,  reason,  love, 
and joy. As we move towards the top, we get closer to 
the truth. As  we move  toward the bottom, we get far­
ther and farther away from the truth. 

The Map shows that the numbers indicate the rel­
ative energy or power of the various levels. For exam­
ple, Apathy  is  far  less  powerful  than  Fear.  Fear  has 
much less energy than Courage, and Neutral has less 
energy than Love. The relative  power of these differ­
ent positions reflects different points of view. 

As  mentioned  previously,  the  arrows  below 
Courage  go  downward,  indicating  that  the  effect  is 
destructive, does not support life, and is in violation of 
truth.  At  the  level  of  Truth,  which  is  denoted  as 
Courage,  the  arrows  are  at  neutraL  They  then  go 
upwards as they move into areas of lovingness, indicat­

229 

230 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ing  that  these  energy fields  nurture  and  support  life 
and are aligned with truth. 

In the time  of acute  catastrophic  experiences, life 
abruptly  becomes  a  nightmare,  and  one  is  suddenly 
overwhelmed by an  emotional  storm. However, tech­
niques  are  available  to  handle  these  acute  events; to 
shorten  their duration, to  relieve  the  pain  and  suffer­
ing, and to diminish the stress to the minimum. 

All  these major life experiences have something in 

common in that they all represent an acute catastroph­
ic loss  to the mind and a  threat to survival. They indi­
cate a major change and have in common the feeling of 
powerlessness  due  to  their  fmality  and  permanency. 
The  mind perceives  that  it  is  stopped and cannot do 
anything about them. It is this phenomenon of the per­
manence  of being stopped and that one is  powerless 
and  cannot  change  the  event  that  contributes  to  the 
intensity  of  the  acute  upset.  How  to  handle  it  will 
depend on one's  orientation to  the  subject  and one's 
knowledge of the whole field of consciousness. 

All  these  experiences unleash a  storm of negative 
feelings,  such  as  shock,  disbelief,  denial,  anger,  guilt, 
tenseness,  self-blame,  resentment,  being  undone  or 
abandoned, rage at God and oneself, self-pity, rage at the 
world, and  rage  at  the  family. All  these  negative  emo­
tions  surface  and  come  on  at  once,  sometimes  in 
sequence and sometimes in combination, but in gener­
al, there is the massive overwhelm of the negative emo­
tions of separation, loss, and intensity that all the expe­
riences share in common. 

First,  there  is  the  sequencing  of shock  and  then 
resentment,  disbelief,  and  anger.  The  sequencing  of 

HAN D LI N G  M A JaR  C R I S E S 

231 

these emotions varies from  experience to  experience 
and  from  person  to  person; the  exact  sequencing  is 
immaterial.The significance is that they unleash every­
thing at the bottom of the Map of Consciousness. 

The energy fields  at the bottom of the Map  are in 
a  negative  direction, and when  one  of these  energy 
fields  becomes strong, it tends to pull the rest below 
level 200 down with it.The grief over loss then seems 
to bring guilt with it, along with a  sense of hopeless­
ness, a fear of the future, a desire to change the whole 
event, and  anger. The  whole  negative  energy field  is 
unleashed  in  one  giant  emergency. The  problem  is 
really  that  of  being  disorganized  by  the  massive 
unleashing of energies. 

The mind tries to use reason to handle these ener­
gies. It  tries  to  think:  its way out of the  dilemma  and 
looks  for  explanations  and  reasons. The  mind  cannot 
succeed in this because the energy-field overwhelm is 
so massive that the thoughts really become a reflection 
of the  negativity  of the  field;  therefore,  the  thoughts 
themselves become negative. 

Another characteristic common to all these experi­
ences is  that they are all at the top of life-stress rating 
scaleS, which numerically  rate  the  degree  of stress  of 
certain  life  events  from  zero  to  100. The  ones  men­
tioned earlier are  at the top of the list. The death of a 
spouse, a child, or family  member, along with divorce, 
are at the top of that scale, so they are all the maximal 
catastrophes that we can face in our overall experience 
of life. The problem to explore is how to convert them 
into acute gains, how to maximize them, and how to use 
them as springboards for major leaps in consciousness. 

232 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

It is  necessary to again review consciousness itself 
and  the  relationship  between  body,  mind,  and  spirit. 
What is  the exact nature of that relationship and how 
can it help us to learn how to handle major crises? As 
mentioned  previously,  the  body  is  unable  to  experi­
ence itself.The body just is, and it is actually insentient. 
We know where the body is because of sensations. We 
don't experience the body; instead, we experience the 
sensations of the body. Sensations themselves have no 
way  of  being  experienced  but  are  experienced  in 
something  greater  than  themselves,  which  is  in  the 
mind. Our awareness of what is going on in the  body 
occurs  because  it  is  being reported  and  experienced 
within mind. 

' 

Mind  has  no  capacity  to  experience  itself.  That 
seems like  a  shocking thought, but a  memory cannot 
experience  its  own  memoryness,  a  thought  cannot 
experience  its  own thoughtness,  and  feelings  cannot 
experience their own feelingness. This is because they 
are  experienced  in  something  greater  than  mind, 
which  is  consciousness  itself.  Because  of  conscious­
ness, one  is  aware  of what  is  going  on  in  the  mind. 
Mind  then  reports  what is  going  on with sensations, 
and sensations report what is going on with the body. 
Therefore, the  experiencing is  several  levels  removed· 
from  the  body  itself.  In line  with  this,  consciousness 
itself  is  unable  to  actually  experience  itself.  It  is 
because  of the energy field  of awareness  that we are 
able to know what is going on within consciousness. It 
reports what is going on in sensations and then reports 
what is  going on with the body. Therefore, where we 
experience experiences is considerably removed from 

HAN D LIN G  MAJ OR  eRr S ES 

233 

the physical body itself. 

~ecause  experiencing  is  going  on  within  con­
sciousness,  we  can  address  the  solution  for  human 
problems  directly  within  the  field  of consciousness, 
thereby  effectively  shortening  and  relieving  the 
amount of pain and suffering and bringing about a far 
more effective result. The results of this technique and 
approach were demonstrated in the handling of physi­
cal  pain,  sickness,  suffering,  depression,  anxiety,  and 
fear. The  same  technique  will  work  in  meeting  these 
acute emotional catastrophic emergencies since where 
one actually lives  is  in the experiencing of one's own 
experiencing. 

A person thinks, "Well, I live in the world. I'm expe­
riencing the world," but what is  really being registered 
is  one's experience of that experience (e.g., the 'expe­
riencer'). We  can  handle  anything  if we  address  this 
exact focus. If we focus on where we are experiencing 
experience, we  can  handle  things  with  precision.  In 
moments  and  minutes,  we  can  handle  things  that 
would take weeks, months, years, and, in fact, even life­
times. We  can  handle  within  an  hour  something  that 
others have been unable to handle over an entire life­
time. We  know  people  who  have  experienced  these 
catastrophic events in early life, and when we see them 
at an older age, it is  still not over for them. The resent­
ment, bitterness,  anger,  disillusionment,  rage,  and  the 
major decisions  that come out of those  negative  feel­
ings  are  still  with  the  person  fifty years  later. It  is  as 
though  the  event  happened  yesterday;  it  is  still 
unhealed and undone, and  the  knowledge  of how to 
handle the overwhelm has not been available to them. 

234 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

We will relate how to handle the overwhelm at the 
level where it is being experienced.We look at the field 
of experiencing to be aware of where experiencing is 
happening.  It  is  not  happening  out  in  the  world,  in 
one's foot, or in one's stomach. It is  happening within 
consciousness. As  one  examines  where  one  experi­
ences  experience, one will fmd that it is  everywhere. 
One does not experience things in a focal point; that is 
a belief system of the mind. For: example, I ask someone 
who is  not aware  of this, "Where  do  you  experience 
your thoughts?" Out of habit the person points to their 
head  and  says, "Here." That  is  a  belief  system-one's 
thoughts about thoughts. One thinks their thoughts are 
in  their head, but that  is  only a  thought. Where  does 
one  actually  think  the  thought  that  one  believes  is 
thought in the head? As  one really considers this with 
a little contemplation and reflection, one will see that 
the actual experiencing is  diffuse  and going on every­
where. One could not put their fmger  on any particu­
lar place where experience is  happening. It is  simulta­
neously everywhere and nowhere. 

Working with that point will reveal something sur­
prising which makes this kind of work precise. I know 
this  because  I  have worked with it clinically for  over 
fifty  years, and  because  I  have  been through  most  of 
the  major life  crises. In fact,  a  few  years  ago,  I  went 
through a half dozen and will share my experience of 
the truth of these things because one can experience 
all of them within oneself. 

It is surprising that the only thing to be handled in 
these  acute  catastrophic  events  is  the  energy  of the 
emotions themselves. If we look at the experience, we 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

235 

see it is  not the event that happened or we think hap­
pened in the world that is the problem but the way we 
feel about it. Who cares about facts? They do not mean 
anything  in  and  of themselves.  It is  one's  emotional 
reaction to the fact. The fact  is  only a fact, a 'nothing'. 
How we feel about the fact is  therefore the only thing 
we really ever have to handle about the events in life. 

Our feelings  come from  our attitudes, beliefs, our 
way of being with them, and the way we view ourself 
in  the  world,  thus  giving  variety  to  the  emotions. 
However, in a  state  of overwhelm, the problem is  the 
handling of just the emotional energy itself. We  do not 
really even have to handle the emotions, just the energy 
of the  emotions. "Yes;'  one  says, "but  what  about  the 
events out there? What am I going to do now with no 
money? What am I going to do with no husband?" and 
so on. Surprisingly, the events are very eaSy to handle. 
There  is  no  acute  catastrophe. The events themselves 
are  really  just handled in  a  mechanical  way once  the 
feelings are set aside. 

There  may  be  some  reluctance,  resentment,  or 
regret, but these are minor things.The handling of the 
actual  issues  within  the  phenomenal  world,  within 
one's  daily  life,  is,  in  contrast, much  easier. They  are 
not the real problems.The thought that they are is just 
coming out of the  energy field  of negative emotions 
where they seem catastrophic, hopeless, unbearable, 
and insurmountable. Once a person comes out on the 
other  side  of  it,  life  adjusts  itself.  Something  else 
comes  in  to  fill  the  vacuum,  and  life  goes  right  on. 
Those issues were simple to solve once the emotions 
were out of the way. 

236 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Life  presents  the  solutions  to  all  problems. 
Necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention,  so  whatever 
dilemma appears in one's life will resolve itself, and the 
energy  of life  resumes.  Life  goes  right  on  no  matter 
how  major  the  catastrophe  seems  at  the  moment. 
Therefore, the problem is  not handling the  event 'out 
there' or the  circumstances  of life  because  they  will 
handle  themselves.  Usually  relatives  or  close  friends 
will handle a  situation for the person who is impaired 
by the overwhelm. The problem is  handling the  ener­
gies that arise. 

When  one  of these  major  negative  energy  fields 
starts to unleash itself, it tends to drag the rest with it. 
Rarely  does  one  experience  just  grief alone.  Guilt  is 
almost always  associated with it in blaming oneself. It 
may take  the form  of questions, such as, Why didn't I 
look as I went around the turn? Why didn't I put chains 
on? Why didn't I take her to the doctor sooner? Maybe 
we could have cured her cancer.Why did I bet on that 
horse? There  is  a  sort  of retrospective  self-recrimina­
tion. There  are  also  apathy  and  hopelessness-life  is 
hopeless;  life  seems  hopeless.  It  looks  like  we  will 
never be happy again. It is like the source of happiness 
has left one's life. Of course, the grief is  natural to the 
loss, and then there are the fears that arise-how will I 
live without whatever it is that I have lost? 

The constant, incessant desire drives us crazy to try 
to change it. What can we do? There is  the bargaining, 
the trying to manipulate, the arguing with God, and the 
making bargains with God:"Oh God, if you will only let 
so-and-so  live, I'll  do this and that." Then there are the 
anger,  the  rage  at  life  and  the  nature  of life,  and  the 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

237 

anger  that  is  displaced  onto  the  people  of life-it is 
somebody's  fault.  All  these  negative  energies  usually 
unleash all at once, and from moment to moment, one 
or  another  may  be  dominant. At  the  same  time,  the 
mind  is  thrashing  around  wildly,  trying  to  come  up 
with  explanations,  trying  to  figure  it  out,  and  it  is 
swamped  by  the  overflow  of energy. The  problem  is 
that  the  energy  is  just  too  much  for  the  mind  to 
process.  It  goes  into  disorganization,  into  adrenaline 
and  stress-hormone  biologic  overwhelm,  and  that 
acute stress throws a person into a state of acute emer­
gency within consciousness itself. 

The problems are not handled on the level at which 
they seem to be occurring but on the next higher energy 
level. Higher energy means greater power. When dealt 
with there, they are handled automatically, which is not 
possible on the lower levels. All we have to handle are 
the  energies  of the  emotional  overwhelm. Does  that 
seem surprising for  a psychiatrist to say?  Most people 
would expect a psychiatrist to begin talking about the 
psychology  of the  intricate  relationship  between  the 
person and the events and what they mean symbolically, 
that is, the psychological components. 

In this instance, we are going to bypass all that and 
instead address  the  energy that the  emotions  release; 
whatever the psychology may be makes no difference. 
There  is  a  massive  release  of the  negative  emotions, 
and it is  appropriate to deal with the energy of those 
emotions.A very effective technique to use is to ignore 
the thoughts because the· mind will never figure them 
out for it does not have the capacity to do so. It is  in a 
state  of massive  overwhelm. The  issues  are  extraordi­

238 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

narily complex, and it would take a lifetime to unravel 
them if a person really wanted to know the full  signifi­
cance of each and every contribution from every level 
of one's psychological self to the total meaning of the 
experiences. It is  not necessary to  do that, and it  is  a 
very good thing  to  not do it. A person only has  to go 
into the feeling itself. 

Notice ftrst that the feeling is  being felt in a gener­
al  way,  and  that  there  is  an  energy  below it.  It  is  as 
though consciousness works this way, as though there 
is a diffuse body of energy that really has no name. One 
might  call  it  the  energy  of emotionalism, the  energy 
behind  feelingness.  Given  a  moment  of time,  this 
diffuse, unnamed energy begins to take the form of, for 
example,  grief,  anger,  rage,  indignation,  self-pity,  or 
jealousy. This  emotional  fteld  at  frrst  was  diffuse  and 
formless but now resembles the form of grief, but there 
is  also  some  fear  and  anger in it.  It is  the  energy of 
emotionality in general. 

When  given  a  split  second  longer,  it  will  take  a 
greater form of a speciftc fear, for example. "How will I 
live  now  without  money  or  something?"  The  fear 
begins to take form, and then thoughts begin to arise 
out of the speciftc emotion of fear. It is like a sequence 
of events and an ocean of suppressed energy. 

We  are  going  to learn how to  decompress  that. If 
one  can  disconnect  the  fuse  and  pull  the  plug, then 
one  is  disconnected from  the  whole  experience  and 
left with an inner s~ate  of peace. 

It will be helpful if one can accept the fact that one 
does not have to do anything about external events or 
even  ftgure  them  out.  A  person  cannot  make  any 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

239 

progress  by looking  at the thoughts  because they are 
endless. One  is  not going  to  make  much headway in 
handling the problem by looking  at the  specific  emo­
tion,  but  there  will  be  a  very  profound  effect  if one 
allows oneself to focus on the energy below the upset. 
As  one catches the experience earlier and earlier, one 
will notice that the energy is diffuse and almost name­
less. It  is  like  a  container  of pressurized  gas  that  is 
seeking release. Its energy has been accumulating for 
a  lifetime, and now it has  a  way out. The  event that 
has  happened  in  life  has  opened  the  sluices,  the 
gates, the  doorway, and  now this  container of com­
pressed,  suppressed. emotional  energy  is  using  this 
opportunity to escape. Once the barn door is open, all 
the animals run out. 

How can one get  out  of the  way of the  running 
animals? One cannot; however, the experience can be 
cut  through  qUickly  by  accepting  the  fact  that  one 
cannot escape it.To try to escape will only prolong it. 
The  mind  will  try  to  figure  out ways  to  escape  the 
emotional energy as though that will reduce the pain; 
however, the  pain  actually  comes from  resisting  the 
experience.To handle this, one just sits down and lets 
go  of resisting  it, choosing instead to  be with it. The 
faster one opens it up, the faster the energy is let out, 
and  the  quicker  the  experience  will  be  over.  The 
whole thing can be released instead of allowing it to 
drag  out  endlessly,  agonizingly,  through  hours,  days, 
weeks, months, years, or even a whole lifetime. 

Remember  we  said  that  when  someone  has  an 
acute injury, such as  a burn on their hand, if they will 
stop everything and use this same method of letting go 

240 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

of resisting by just opening the door and welcoming it 
and saying, "In fact, I want more of it," more of the ener­
gy of that experience, and if they will ignore what goes 
on in mind-ignore the thoughts but allow the experi­
ence of the energy field-the mind will say, "Well, I'm 
experiencing grief." That is  a  label, so we will  say that 
all  thoughts  are  labels  and have  no reality-in reality, 
none of these things exist. If a loved one dies, the mind 
automatically says "grief;' which is  a label. Because the 
mind  has  power  over  emotions  and  the  capacity  to 
give them form, the belief that to lose someone causes 
grief gives form to the emotion.The energy field of the 
emotions is actually formless, but when one insists that 
. it is  grief, it then takes the form  of grief. If somebody 
holds a gun to our head, we are naturally convinced in 
mind that this calls for fear; therefore, the same energy 
now assumes a somewhat different form labeled "fear." 
It is  preferable to decrease the form of the energy 
field and stop labeling it anything.We don't tell people, 
"You know,I'm going through grief; I'm going through 
fear; I'm going through an upset."An 'upset' is closer to 
the truth. It is a general term because it is very hard to 
say what the emotion is in an acute upset. Initially, one 
usually  experiences  a  sense  of shock, numbness, and 
disbelief  that  this  could  have  happened. That  is  the 
moment to begin this practice.A person is prepared if 
they know about the technique in advance. 

Several  years  ago,  I went through  such an  experi­
ence  and  instantly  began  letting  go  of  resisting  the 
experience. I constantly canceled out the thoughts. For 
instance, the  loss  seemed  like  forever,  a  lifetime.  It is 
not the loss  of a  lifetime  that is  the problem, it is  the 

HANDLING  MA] 0  R  CRI SES 

241 

energy of the emotion that comes up about that. Once 
the energy of the emotion about the loss  dissipates, it 
becomes sort of a "So what?"The problem is the acute 
catastrophic emotionality, so one just has to be with it. 
The technique is  to allow oneself to  experience it. In 
fact, to get over it in a hurry, just ask for more!  Say  to 
yourself, "~  want more of it; I want more of it." 

We  can eventually see that this is a major opportu­
nity. The cause of all pain and suffering is  the accumu­
lation  of this compressed energy field, and life  events 
give  us an excuse. It opens the gate so we allow our­
selves to feel some of it. For example, somebody bumps 
the fender of our car.All the suppressed anger that we 
have accumulated over our lifetime now has an excuse 
to pop out. It gets angry over the dented fender; it gets 
annoyed and goes into self-pity and blame. The events 
in life are the excuses for letting go of the compressed 
energy. Because it becomes unbearable, the mind fmds 
a way to discharge it that is acceptable to us. 

A person who is familiar with this will feel the com­
pressed energy and begin to release it without waiting 
for  the  mind  to  create  an  excuse  that  justifies  its 
release.The more sophisticated mind does not need an 
outside event to release its angriness. It just knows that 
it  is  building  up  some  suppressed  angriness  and  sits 
down and says, "I had better look at this:' It then starts 
letting  go  of the  energy  of  it  before  the  mind  gets 
around  and  creates  something  'out  there'  to  relieve 
itself. It is as  though the events in our lives are almost 
like safety or release valves, providing a way to decom­
press this energy tank. 

The technique is one of decompression. It is  look­

242 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ing at the energy as it is being experienced. We do not 
have to handle the thoughts or the problems that the 
mind creates around this particular event. When a per­
son looks at any life experience, they will see that they 
live within their feelings about it.The life event itself is 
really  a  'nothing'.  In  the  morning,  it  may  look  cata­
strophic, but by noon, it might be amusing. The event 
has  not  changed  at  all.  The  dented  fender,  at  the 
moment it happens, may be an outrage of indignation. 
The minute we think about it, we start to feel guilty.We 
know very well that we turned a little too sharply our­
self. Maybe  an  hour later we are  feeling  sorry for  the 
other guy because now he has  an insurance problem. 
We  realize  it  really  was  not· his  fault,  and  we  have  a 
desire  to  make  it up to him. Now we are  into feeling 
guilty and blaming ourself again. Then we think about 
it all again, and now we go back into rage. We see what 
we are living with.Are we living with a dented fender? 
The  fact  is  that  we  never  really  lived  with  a  dented 
fender; we only lived our own inner experience of that. 
How we  are  with  that  is  what we  are  experiencing. 
People  never  experience  the  dented  fenders  in  life, 
only their emotions about them. 

When we look at it from this perspective, it is  not 
quite as bad an overwhelm.The only thing we are ever 
going to have to handle is the same energy, the subtle, 
inner feelingness, and then let go of resisting it, surren­
der to  it,  and welcome  it.  Saying yes  to  it  releases  its 
energy. After  doing  this  for  a  few  minutes,  or maybe 
even an hour (it depends on how adept one is---'some 
people  get it  right  away  and  some  need  a  little  prac­
tice), a  person gets  where  it  is  and  no  longer has  to 

HAN D LI N G  M AJ 0  R  C R I S E S 

243 

even handle or experience the emotions as such. What 
was fear  disappears  and  is  not felt  as  fear  any longer. 
Anger is  not felt  as  angriness; guilt is  not felt  as guilti­
ness  per se. The  emotion is  felt  as  an  overwhelming; 
upcoming  flow  of a  negative  energy  that  is  actually 
generic and nameless. 

When we stop naming, labeling, or calling the energy 
something, we no  ~onger  have  to  handle  it. When we 
stop  putting  constructions  and  interpretations  of the 
mind  onto  it, when we  let go  of wanting  to  make  it 
right or wrong or the event or ourself wrong, when we 
bypass all that, we then get the feelingness of it and see 
that we do not have to handle all that. We  do not have 
to handle the thought or even the emotions of it.All we 
have to do is handle the same upcoming energy. 

Can we do that? Yes, we can because we are doing 
it all  the time anyway. It is  a  more effective technique 
than wildly racing around in our mind trying to figure 
it out, or running around inside our feelings and trying 
to  handle  the  catastrophic  emotions  because,  at  the 
same time, this letting go of the energy field is happen­
ing anyway. 

It  is  helpful  to  become  conscious  of  it,  to  cut 
through  the  confusion  and  get  right  to  the  essential 
point  of what  is  effective. Dealing  with  the  thoughts 
and the events with all  the reasoning, logic, and figur­
ing it out, and dealing with all the probing into the psy­
chological significances is  entertaining but thoroughly 
ineffective. It is  a  waste of time  and energy and really 
delays the recovery. 

The healing of an acute burn of the hand takes only 

a matter of seconds. How long should it take the bleed­

244 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ing to stop if we have cut off a thumb? It actually takes 
a matter of seconds. For example, when I unintention­
ally cut my thumb off, I instantly used this technique, 
and  the  thumb  bled  exactly  eight  drops. The  instant 
releasing of it, the releasing of the pain, and the letting 
go  of  the  resistance  of  the  catastrophic  overwhelm 
allowed the bleeding to stop instantaneously. 

Those people who have  tried this  technique  have 

had the same experience on the physical level, demon­
strating the truth of this. It can be done with any emo­
tion. One goes into the emotion, then past the emotion, 
and  stops  calling  it  anything. One  gets  in touch with 
the generic energy of what is  coming up. It seems to 
come right up through the solar plexus, or it seems to 
be  everywhere. One  goes  right  to  where  the  experi­
ence is being experienced. One has to use a little disci­
pline with the mind and refuse  to have the mind fool 
oneself. The  person  says, "Well,  I'm  experiencing  the 
death of that person out there:' One is  not experienc­
ing it 'out there'; one is experiencing it 'in here' .Where 
is  that?  It is  the  same place where one always experi­
ences experience-within the feeling self. 

The only problem is one's own feelingness.The real 
problem  is  not  actually  the  death  of  someone  'out 
there'.A person is up against the energy of one's own 
feelingness, the overwhelm of the energy of that. If one 
directs their attention and focuses  it there with preci­
sion,  it  aborts  what  could  be  a  prolonged  and  very 
painful experience; it is brought to an abrupt end. 

What  happens  if we  keep  on  letting  go  of this 
energy? What happens if we welcome  it?  What if we 
say,  "What  an  opportunity  to  decompress  all  this"? 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

245 

What will be the experience then? It will be relatively 
brief compared to what it would be with an ordinary 
state of consciousness. Suddenly, the energy field stops. 
It is  as though, when the pressure gauge  on the com­
pression chamber reaches a certain point, the overflow 
stops, and then we experience a  state of peace. Right 
out  of  acute  catastrophe  come  profound  states  of 
peace. If someone has  been through  this, they under­
stand what is  meant here. The core of relief is sur­
rendering the energy at great depth. 

Suddenly, all  the  agony  stops  and instead, there  is 
almost  a  silence, an infmite  presence, an infinite  state 
of peace, something that may be greater than any expe­
rience a person has had in their life previously.They are 
not the same when they come out on the other side of 
it. From then on, they are lighter, freer, and less subject 
to pain within their own emotional experience. 

Clinically, what usually happens is  that the person 
now sighs with relief. They realize that life  is  going to 
continue and they can live with it.As bad as it seemed, 
somehow they can survive. Peace continues for a vari­
able period of time, and then a wave of the emotional­
ity comes back. It tends to return in waves, with peri­
ods of relief in between. When the wave  comes back, 
they welcome it again and try to release as  much out 
of the  pressure  as  they  can  before  the  valve  closes 
again: They welcome it as a very valuable opportunity, 
and since it may not happen very many times in life, it 
is one to be treasured.The value of it comes only when 
a  person is  really on the other side of the experience 
and can look back on it with the wisdom that has been 
gained and understand that the mind is not going to be 

246 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

of any real help in the experience. This is because the 
mind looks in the wrong direction and says, "If I could 
only change the circumstances of the event out there, 
then I would feel all right."There are some good clinical 
examples of that. 

There  was  the  case  of a  woman  who  received  a 
telegram  saying  her  son  was  killed  in Vietnam. As  a 
result, she stopped talking, sat in a rocking chair near a 
window, and just kept rocking back and forth, staring 
numbly  out  the  window.  She  was  in  the  state  called 
apathy, with complete loss of energy.The world looked 
hopeless, and  to her, God was  dead. She  rocked back 
and forth in this hopeless state, not responding verbally 
to her family. She refused to eat, barely slept, with naps 
perhaps  during  the  night, and  just stared blankly  out 
the window in  a  state  of total apathy. We  found  that 
certain changes had taken place in her brain chemistry 
as  a  result  of this,  with  the  neurotransmitters  being 
depleted. 

In the meantime, the family  did not know what to 
do  and  was  very  disturbed. About  ten  days  later,  the 
family  received  another  telegram  from  the  U.  S. 
Department of Defense saying that it was all a mistake, 
that the son had not been killed in action, that it was 
another  serviceman  with  the  same  name  and  an  ID 
number that was just one digit different, and there had 
been  a  computer  error. The  family  told  the  woman, 
"Mother,  Mother,  he's  not  dead!"  She  went  right  on 
rocking, staring blankly out the window as  though she 
did not even hear them. 

So, changing the circumstances in the outer world 
is not necessarily going to change the upset because it 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

247 

has  started a  process. It is  the process  that has  to be 
handled. It  is  not the  events  that  have  happened  out 
there  that  have  to  be  accepted,  because  that  is  just 
what  we  cannot  do.  We  cannot  accept  the  circum­
stances that have happened in our life.What we can do 
is accept and surrender to the fact that one has to bite 
the  bullet  and  be  with  the  situation  right  now.  For 
example, if our leg is caught in the bear trap and there 
is  no  way  out,  we  surrender  to  the  experiencing 
itself-the necessity to sit through it, face  it, handle it, 
and surrender to the experiencing of the experience, 
using the techniques already presented. 

To be effective, one pays little attention to the mind 

because  the  mind  really  has  no  solution  to  the  prob­
lem. The  mind  says,  "If only  we  could  change  those 
external circumstances."This is where people's experi­
ences with prayer often come in. Not knowing what to 
pray  for,  they  may  come  out  of  it  with  bitterness 
because they were praying in the wrong direction.Very 
often the prayer goes in the direction of "Please  undo 
that,  please  bring  joy  back  to  life.  Please  bring  my 
thumb  back;  please  change  what  is  happening  out 
there." Prayer in that direction is very likely to be inef­
fective  because  the  form  of the  prayer  is  like, "Dear 
God, please let  me  be one foot  taller." Is  the  problem 
God's,  or is  the  problem  the  lack  of comprehension 
about how to pray? 

At  this point, the prayer might be, "Please  be with 

me; show me how to surrender and handle this experi­
ence," and ask for conscious awareness of the Presence 
of God. We would be asking God to take on the experi­
encing in place of ourself. Curiously, as we keep surren­

248 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

dering the experiencing to the experience, as we let go 
of resisting and labeling it, we are progressively surren­
dering it. 

We have to refuse the attraction to pay attention to 
the thought and to 'do something' out there to try to 
change  the  situation. Then  arises  the  willingness  to 
surrender the labeling and cause the emotional energy 
to take form. The total surrendering to the energy itself 
takes  us  to  an  inner state  as  we keep  getting  deeper 
into the surrender that something is experiencing, and 
something is  handling the experiencing of the experi­
ence for  ourself. It is  as  though the personal self now 
withdraws,  and  all  we  can  say  is  that  the  energy  is 
being handled. 

Those who pray in that direction become aware of 
that which is  handling the experience because, as  one 
gets  deep  into  the  surrender  of the  experience, one 
realizes  that it is  being  handled. It is  as  though  some 
energy  field,  some  infmite  mode  of existence,  some 
aspect of beingness, is handling it.Then comes the sur­
prising realization that one was never handling it at all 
to begin with, that it was some kind of illusion that was 
projecting oneself into it, giving it form, and identifying 
with what was causing the pain. The pain comes from 
resistance and the insistence that the personal self and 
all of its aspects have to handle it, that it must do some­
thing about the experience out there-sue somebody, 
change the house, or move to a  different location-as 
it surrenders that along with its thinkingness. It surren­
ders wanting to control and change it. It surrenders to 
the  inner experience  and eventually sees it as  a  great 
gift but only when coming out on the other side of it. 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

249 

To  those who are aligned consciously in their lives 
with spiritual work, what does spiritual work look like 
to you? What  do you  think of spiritual work? What is 
the nature of what you call spiritual, or consciousness, 
or  dealing  with your  unconscious  or your  supercon­
scious? What does it look like to you? 

Some people who have spent many years at it have 
said they see a  person kneeling down and praying, or 
they  see  a  person  in  church. They see  a  person  at  a 
gathering  with  everybody  holding  hands .and  saying 
"Om," and they see light in the center of the circle.They 
picture  themselves  sitting  with  a  book  and  studying 
late until midnight or 1:00 AM. They see themselves lis­
tening to audiotapes of well-known spiritual speakers, 
or see themselves at convocations for 'body, mind, and 
spirit' , or at healing services. This is a whole panorama 
of  what  the  mind  encompasses  and  calls  'spiritual 
work'. 

When faced with a life  crisis, however, it does not 
seem like 'spiritlial' work. Spiritual work is pictured as 
studying a textbook, looking at a picture of a guru, and 
singing  songs. Then  an  acute  catastrophe  occurs, and 
the spiritual work is bypassed. It then resumes after all 
the  various  emergencies  and  tasks  in  one's  life  have 
been handled. 

It is  as  though we do not really see the essence of 
spiritual work. We  do  not  see  that  the  spiritual  work 
brings  up these acute crises, brings us into them, and 
that they are an opportimity. This is where the spiritual 
work is happening.The other was preparation, gathering 
of information  and  experience,  deciding  on  direction, 
and accumulating spiritual knowledge. Then suddenly 

250 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

comes the moment of truth, the time to do it. 

There are people who have  been in spiritual work 
and  around  metaphysical  circles  for  many  years,  and 
nothing changes in their lives. They have the same ill­
nesses  and  problems; their  personal  life  is  the  same. 
They  have  not  had  any  of the  experiences  of inner 
truth that they hear about, and why is that? When life 
brings the golden opportunity to them, that is the time 
to make the spiritual knowledge real. It is the time for 
transformation, the time to take that leap in conscious­
ness. These are golden moments. 

Acute  catastrophes  are  the  times  when  we  make 
great leaps, when we face them directly and ftxedly say, 
"I  will not veer from  this spiritual work." Now we are 
really  confronted  with  truly  spiritual  work.  It is  not 
reading  some pleasant-sounding phrases in  a  book or 
looking at some happy picture. Instead, we are right in 
the thick of it, in the teeth of it. The teeth of spiritual 
work occur when we are confronted with that which 
we  cannot  avoid.  It  is  the  direct  confrontation  that 
requires a leap in consciousness. 

These are the golden opportunities that are price­
less if we see them that way, if we are willing to be with 
them and say, "Okay."The willingness to go with them, 
no matter how painful it may be, enables a giant leap in 
consciousness, a  real  advance  in wisdom, knowledge, 
and awareness.That which we read about in the books 
then becomes our own inner experience. 

There is  something below the  emotionality that is 
experiencing this energy out for a  person. It is literally 
being  handled  by  something  far  greater  than  one's 
personal  self.  If only  the  small  personal  self  were 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

251 

present, one would be totally swamped and obliterated 
by  the  energy  released  during  these  experiences. 
One  survives  the  experiences because there is  some­
thing greater than the  personal self that is  more  than 
capable of handling them. 

The trick of the mind is  to not see that. It tries to 
change what goes on 'out there', tries  to figure  it out, 
and then falls  back on the intellect and fmds  that the 
intellect is  not going to resolve  this  kind  of problem. 
When we have dropped a  big oak log on our foot and 
broken all the bones across the front of the foot, what 
is needed at that moment is  our readiness and willing­
ness to handle what life presents. Having the tools and 
the willingness brings about very rapid healing. 

There is the awareness in acute overwhelm that we 
really  can  handle  the  experiences.  Part  of the  panic 
comes  from  the  realization  that  what  we  think  we 
are-our powerless, limited  self-is no match for  the 
power  of  this  experience. That  is  precisely  what  is 
going on-the limited, individual, personal self cannot 
handle  the  overwhelm. This  is  the  precise  spiritual 
value of it.What do we really want to change about the 
experience? We  will  see  that  what we  want  to  do  is 
change how we feel about it.What we can know is that 
the feeling will come and go.The event is not going to 
bother  us  after  the  feeling  state. All  that  we  have  to 
experience through is the acute upsurge and energy of 
the emotion.The events will take care of themselves. 

The  desire  to  change what occurred and how we 
feel about it have to be surrendered.The confrontation 
is there, and all we can do is  say yes to experiencing it 
through,  no  matter  what  the  nature  is,  such  as  the 

252 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

death  of  a  loved  one,  divorce,  separation,  an  acute 
emergency, or a  catastrophic  injury. All  bring  about  a 
state  of shock that is  the  same, no matter what is  the 
precipitating event.The shock is the sudden realization 
of our powerlessness, the fact  that the will has met  a 
brick  wall,  that  we  are  stoppable  and  have  been 
stopped, and that the personal will cannot have its way. 
Therefore, the  shock  and  realization  of all  this  is  the 
same in all the experiences, along with the fact that it 
is unchangeable and permanent.That is the shock. It is 
as though we come up full speed against a brick wall, 
and every time in life when we do this, it releases the 
same energy field. 

If you have  been through more than one of these 
experiences in your life, you can look back and realize 
that this is so, and that each time the state of shock was 
the  same.  The  experience  and  sequence  were  the 
same.There was the experience with the feeling of sud­
den  numbness,  the  state  of  disbelief,  and  then  the 
unleashing of all the negative feelings. 

When  we  look  at  the  negative  feelings  precisely 

and at some of the experiences we have  had, we real­
ize that we experienced all of this.We experienced the 
totality of that negative energy field. In the morning it 
would be present, and in the afternoon it would still be 
present. In fact, within a  minute's time, we fluctuated 
back and forth. It is  like  a  scintillating  energy field  in 
which the form  of the emotionality is flickering from 
anger to resentment, to self-pity, to  jealousy, to getting 
even, to revenge, to hate, to hating God, to hating one­
self, to blaming the family  and society, to blaming the 
government and laws.The mind wildly races around in 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

253 

this  negative  energy field. We  can see the  diffuseness 
and formlessness  of it. It is like a  basketful of negative 
energy, and we only have to handle the basket, not all 
the little things that are flickering around in it.We only 
have  to  handle  the  'all'  of it. When  we  see  that  it  is 
decompressing  the  'all'  of  it,  it  moves  us  rapidly 
through it  and out the  other side. We  see that it is  an 
inescapable experience,·and we must have the willing­
ness to surrender to the work that has to be done now. 
How can we tell when that work is finished? When we 
suddenly come out into that inner state of peace. 

We  know that years later people continue to have 
resentment  and  anger  and  are  still  caught  in  some 
aspect of that negative energy field because the events 
were  not  handled  in  the  first  place. The  person  was 
unwilling to sit down and handle them until completed. 
People  are  unwilling  to  do  this  because  of the  pain 
involved and because they do not know the techniques 
to use. Every time they go at it, they again start trying 
to  change  the  events  in  the  world  and  handle  the 
thoughts.The intellect and the mind try to figure it out, 
and the person runs into the same impasse. By not hav­
ing an effective tool with which to handle the events, 
the work remains incomplete. 

What happens with the incomplete work and the 
emotions  that  were  not  released?  That  which  is  left 
undone begins to express itself in emotional attitudes 
and in the body in the form of illness.The unconscious 
guilt  that was  not let go  of over the  catastrophe  that 
happened  many'  years  ago  comes  forth  through  the 
autonomic nervous system and the acupuncture energy 
system and connects with something from  the mind. 

254 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

The  energy field  of the  intellect of thinkingness  is  in 
the  400s. The  energy field  of guilt, fear,  or anger then 
couples with some belief system in the mind about a 
particular illness that results in a physical illness. In psy­
choanalysis, it would be  called psychosomatic, and in 
this  case,  the  contribution  of  the  psychological  ele­
ment is on the surface and quite visible.The end result 
of the unresolved emotional handling of a catastrophic 
experience  is  often  an  illness  that  may  occur  many 
years later.The grief that was left undone at the time of 
the death of some family member twenty years earlier, 
for example, may now express itself as a heart attack. 

A thing  has  been handled when we feel  at peace 
and complete with it. It no longer recurs or brings up 
pain when we think  about  it;  we feel  satisfied. There 
may be regret about having to live through it, but some­
how we come out on the other side of it as a different 
kind  of person, and with  that knowledge, there  is  a 
certain  sense  of peace  that  lets  us  know  it  has  been 
handled now. 

Catastrophic experiences are  the  seeds, the very 
essence, of the  ultimate  spiritual experience. Within 
it and following it to its very center core, totally walk­
ing  off the  cliff  in  complete  abandonment,  the  full 
surrender  to  the  experience  is  the  very  seed  and 
core  of  that  which  the  spiritual  seeker  has  been 
searching for all along. 

With many catastrophic  situations  in ordinary life, 
there is  an incomplete resolution of the  experiences, 
along with a lack of awareness of the jewel-like qualities 
and  opportunities  within  the  events.  We  are  over­
whelmed  by  the  'whatness'  of them  and  look  in  the 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

255 

wrong  direction. The  mind  also  gets  a  secret  payoff 
from negative emotions (e.g., attention, self-pity, drama) 
plus indulgence in martyrdom, etc. 

Many  times  when  drugs  are  introduced,  altered 
states of consciousness occur, and the person is taken 
to  the  emergency  room. What  could  be  a  crucial 
spiritual  discovery  is  covered  over  with  a  band-aid, 
and  the  family  tries  to  distract  the  person from  the 
spiritual work. 

The essential aspect of the spiritual benefit comes 
from  running directly into the experience. There is  a 
saying  in  Zen  to  "Walk  straight  ahead,  no  matter 
what," so when this catastrophic experience comes, it 
is beneficial to center oneself right into'the core of it, 
say "yes" to it and experience it through. 

There  have  been  catastrophic  experiences  in  my 
life  when  band-aids  were  available,  and  I  refused  to 
accept them because by then I  had learned the value 
of experiencing  them  through. The  band-aids  really 
prevent  the  experiencing  through  of what  might  be 
called 'hitting bottom'. The concept of hitting bottom, 
which is  well  known in  handling  many serious  prob­
lems, such as alcoholism, means to let go completely. 

In an acute catastrophic situation, the mind tries to 

cling to that which is familiar. It tries escapism, distrac­
tions,  tranquilizers,  drugs  and  alcohol,  and  various 
other ways of trying to ameliorate  the situation rather 
than face it directly and work through it. 

The  essence  of  a  catastrophic  situation  is  total 
surrender to the discovery of that which is greater than 
the personal self. The experiencing through completely 
of a catastrophe brings us into a connection and a real­

256 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

ization that there is something within ourself that has 
the power to sustain, no matter how catastrophic the 
experience appears to be.As a result, we come out on 
the other side of it as a greater person with the aware­
ness  that  there  is  something  within,  that  there  is  a 
Presence, a  quality, or an aspect of life within that has 
the  power to  sustain  us  through  the  most  seemingly 
impossible situations. 

If  the  catastrophic  experience  is  not  worked 
through completely; there are certain residuals. It is like 
we have only halfway fallen off the cliff. Some people 
think  they have  walked  off the  cliff,but  actually  we 
find  that they were secretly crossing their fingers  and 
hanging  onto  some  little  outcropping  or lifeline. The 
abandonment to  God was not really total, so  a  doubt 
remains,  and  out  of that  doubt  is  the  residual  of,  for 
example, grief or fear of the experience. If we do not 
experience  something  greater  than  the  personal  self 
when going  through the  experience, we may end up 
with a limitation, a certain crippling, the inability to go 
beyond a  certain point, and the willingness to partici­
pate becomes limited. The person says, "I would rather 
live  a  limited  life  than  face  that  kind  of experience 
again. I would rather never love again than to love and 
10se."The saying is, "'Tis better to have loved and lost, 
.than  never to  have  loved  at  all:' The  experiencing  of 
lOVingness puts us in touch with our Self, that which is 
greater than our own limited, small self. 

The  complete  resolution  brings us into  conscious 
contact with something that is greater than the personal 
self. Many people who have tried this attest to the fact 
that  when  they  surrendered  the  small  self  to  some­

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

257 

thing greater than themselves, they came into contact 
with that which they considered to be 'real'. That per­
sonal  inner  experience  of spiritual  reality  takes  one 
from  book  learning  to  a  profound  inner  conviction. 
Out of this inner conviction comes the willingness to 
re-enter life  again, to  participate in it, and to take  the 
risks and chances. 

What is  the inner experience of hitting bottom?  It 
comes out of the feelings of hopelessness and despair; 
the person's small self is saying, "I, of my own self, can­
not  handle  this."  The  person  surrenders  out  of  the 
hopelessness, and from  that  comes the willingness  to 
let go, to surrender to something greater than oneself. 
At the very bottom, in the pits, one realizes and accepts 
the truth that "I, of myself, my own individual personal 
self,  my own ego-self,  am  unable  to  handle  this.  I  am 
unable to resolve it." It is  out of this defeat that victory 
and success arise.The phoenix rises out of the ashes of 
despair  and  hopelessness.  It  is  not  the  despair  and 
hopelessness  that  are  of value  but  the  letting  go  and 
the realization of the limitation of the small self. In the 
middle of the catastrophe, the person says, "I give up. I 
cannot  handle  this,"  and  then  may  consciously  or 
unconsciously ask God for help. 

Due to the law of free  will and the nature of con­
sciousness  being  what  it  is,  it is  said  that  the  great 
beings that are willing to help all of us are waiting for 
us to say "yes:' It is the sudden turning from the bottom 
of the barrel to the willingness to accept that there is 
something greater than ourselves that we can turn to. 
When the person says, "If there is  a  God, I  ask him to 
help  me,"  then  the  great  transformative  experiences 

258 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

happen  that  have  been  recorded  throughout  history 
from the very beginning. 

The beginning of the great worldwide organization 
of Alcoholics Anonymous  (AA)  came  out  of such  an 
experience. Bill W, the famous founder  of AA,  had hit 
bottom. He was in a  state  of total despair and hope­
lessness and gave up the personal self.At the time, he 
was a nonbeliever, but he said, "If there is a God, I ask 
him to help me." At that moment came a great trans­
formative experience, the spiritual power of which is 
evidenced by the millions of lives that have been affected 
by  the  energy that flowed  out into  the  world  as  the 
result of this man's sharing his spiritual experience. 

Obviously, letting go and hitting bottom are crucial. 
It is out of the awareness that we cannot change things 
and are  limited  and powerless that we  discover what 
does  have  the  power  in  the  universe.  That  power 
comes  in  and  handles  the  experience, and  we  know 
when that happens  because  of the profound state  of 
peace. Where there was agony, there is  now a  state of 
infInite peace and an ineffable awareness of an InfInite 
Presence. 

Historically, it has  been a  speCial  occasion when a 
realization of the truth has arisen, but that is  not at all 
necessary; it is  only  one  type  of experience. Actually, 
this is the nature of spiritual work all the time.The per­
son who is involved in spiritual work is always looking 
at what is occurring in life, seeing it as  the teacher, as 
the grist for the mill.What is happening represents that 
which  is  being  worked  on,  so  an  acute  catastrophe 
would  just  be  a  continuation  of  the  process  that  is 
going on anyway.As a result, the person who is intensely 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

259 

involved in spiritual work would then see it as a golden 
opportunity, painful and regretful perhaps, but one of 
great benefit.The essential nature of spiritual work is to 
remain focused  on what arises from instant to instant 
and become aware of 'what' is experiencing and where 
it is being experienced. 

There is a meditative and contemplative technique 
that can be use to bring about the same result. It is the 
process of constantly letting go  of wanting to control 
the  experiencing as  well  as  experiencing itself. There 
then  occurs  the  sudden  realization  that  awareness  is 
being  handled  by  some  infinite  aspect  of conscious­
ness (the Self); this may have been suspected previously 
but  not  actually  realized.  After  this  realization,  the 
.awareness of the Presence occurs more frequently. 

Out of this experience comes an ever greater will­
ingness  to  rely  on that  inner Presence, with less  and 
less  reliance  on  the  small  self.  Less  frequently,  then, 
does the person look to  the small self to handle life's 
problems,  as  there  is  a  progressive  willingness  to 
surrender to one's higher Self. The progressive loss of 
identification  with  the  small  self  and  the  increasing 
identification  with  the  Presence, along with  the will­
ingness to surrender life and all of its aspects to the will 
of God, become the very core of the person's spiritual 
exercise and experience. 

The acute catastrophic experience is  a  key learn­

ing opportunity that teaches us to go to the very core, 
to the very essence of the experience, to see what it 
is and handle it at the level of experiencing within the 
energy field  of consciousness itself. There is  the will­
ingness  to  surrender  and  to  let  go  of  wanting  to 

260 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

change what happened 'out there'.There is the letting 
go of wanting to control by thinking about it and try­
ing to handle  it  with the intellect and the  emotions. 
There  is  the willingness  to  surrender to  the  essence 
of the experience without calling it anything, or label­
ing it, or putting names on it. There is  the willingness 
to handle the energy field of it and go directly to the 
inner experience. The  surrender to the  inner experi­
ence is the open doorway to the experience of some­
thing greater than the small personal self. 

Each  catastrophe, therefore, is  a  repeat  a!ld  repre­
sentation of another opportunity for  this  great  spiritual 
learning experience; therefore, people who have been 
through great catastrophic experiences express their 
gratitude.  Often  people  say,  "Although  I  wouldn't 
want  to  live  though  it  again,  I  am  very  grateful  for 
that experience." 

How could a person be grateful for what the world 

considers a terrible catastrophe or a dreadful, progres­
sive  illness? What they learned out of the catastrophe 
was of such a great dimension that the price was worth 
it because, through the realization of truth, they discov­
ered the reconnection with the essential core of their 
beingness. 

As we grow spiritually and become spiritually edu­
cated, it takes  less and less  to bring about the willing­
ness to face this inner experience. It could be said that 
a  person's  'bottom  of  the  barrel'  gets  progressively 
raised. The person does not have to go through agoniz­
ing pain before they are willing to let go and surrender. 
More and more there arises a willingness to do it on a 
daily basis so that it becomes part and parcel of one's 

HANDLING  MAJOR  CRISES 

261 

life, with the constant looking at how one is  trying to 
control things, or trying to change God's will, or how 
one  is  going  to try to  change  and  control  God. More 
often  there  is  the  willingness  to  totally  surrender  at 
great depth, and then one sees that surrender occurs at 
different depths. 

In  ordinary  life,  we  surrender  a  little  bit.  Under 
greater  pressure,  we  are  willing  to  surrender  more 
and  realize  that  we  do  not  have  to  put  ourselves 
under catastrophic pressure in order to be willing to 
surrender at  great  depth. The  transformation  of per­
sonality, the whole shift in one's spiritual position, tra­
ditionally  comes  from  surrendering  at  great  depth. 
What does it mean to surrender at great depth? How 
can  we  surrender  at  great  depth  without  having  to 
put  ourselves  through  a  terrible  emotional  catastro­
phe in order to accomplish the  same  spiritual work? 
By  seeing  the  essential  nature  of  the  process,  we 
become educated. Our positions shift and we are dif­
ferent in the way we are.We are willing to be with life 
in  all  its  expressions. The willingness  is  then experi­
enced as  an inner state of aliveness. Arising from that 
is the willingness to take the chance because we now 
know that we are accompanied by something greater 
than the personal self. It is  not the personal self that 
has  to  handle  what  comes  up  in  life. The  Infinite 
Presence that is always with us is more powerful than 
the  human  will  and  ego. The  self  brings  pain  and 
suffering; the Self radiates healing and peace. 

CHAPTER  9 

Worry, Fear, and Anxiety 

As discussed previously, holistic health uses the phrase 
"body, mind, and spirit" frequently, so it will be helpful 
to understand more about it.What does it really mean? 
Is  it just a  catch phrase  or a  slogan?  Is 'spirit' a  meta­
physical abstraction or a religious dictum? Is it a fantasy 
of people who are  not very well connected with the 
real world? Defining this relationship again will help us 
to speed up our work through greater understanding. 
Again, we want to review how human experience 
comes  about  and  also  look  within  ourselves  to  see 
where this phenomenon actually occurs. In looking at 
the  relationship  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit  from  the 
viewpoint  of  experience,  some  things  may  sound 
somewhat startling, such as the fact that the body can­
not experience itself. That may be a surprising thought 
because all of us tend to think of ourselves as being the 
body and to think, "I am the body." However, this is not 
true  because  the  body is  unable  to  experience  itself. 
For  example, my left  arm  cannot experience  its  own 
left  armness. There  are  sensations  coming  from  the 
body, but I am not experiencing the body. Instead, I am 
experiencing the sensations of the body, but curiously 
enough, they cannot experience themselves either.The 
sensations  coming  from  the  arm  have  to  be  experi­
enced somewhere, however, which is in the mind. 

If we have an incision in the brain that deletes part 
of the operating mind, or at least the way it operates on 
the physical plane, we fail  to experience the opposite 
side  of the  body. This  is  very common  after  a  stroke 
where  the  patient  is  unable  to  experience  in  mind 

263 

264 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

even the existence of a portion of their body.Thus, the 
body  cannot  be  experienced  without  the  sensation, 
and  the  sensation  can  only  be  experienced  in  mind. 
Interestingly,  the  mind  cannot  experience  itself.  A 
thought  cannot  experience  its  ow~  thoughtness,  a 
memory cannot experience its  own memoryness, and 
a  fantasy  cannot experience  its  own fantasyness. That 
which goes on in mind actually has to be experienced 
in an energy field that is greater than mind itself, which 
is called 'consciousness'. 

Consciousness  enables  one  to  be  aware  of what 

goes on within mind and is  the basic reason for anes­
thesia.With anesthesia, consciousness is deleted, which 
results in there being no awareness of what is going on 
in mind. With no consciousness, there is  no awareness 
of mind or body; with no mind, there is no awareness 
of sensations or the body. Consequently, we will notice 
by watching ourself throughout the day that all of our 
experiences are  being experienced in a  more general 
way than realized and in a more general field  of expe­
rience that is  almost diffuse. It is almost as though it is 
everywhere in space, and this is within consciousness 
itself. 

It is an interesting experiment to find out where we 
think  we  really  experience  a  thought.  Most  people 
think it is in their heads, but that is  the thought about 
a  thought. If we ask them to  now let go  of any belief 
about  where  they  think  they  are  'experiencing  a 
thought and instead point to exactly where a thought 
is  being  experienced-the radical  truth of where  the 
phenomenon is occurring-they learn that there is no 
particular place that thoughtness occurs. All  they can 

WO RRY,  FEAR,  AN D  ANXIE TY 

265 

say is that thoughtness is occurring, and they have an 
awareness  of the  thoughtness,  but  they  cannot  put 
their finger on where it could possibly be-no partic­
ular place where it is being eXPfrienced in a general, 
overall way. 

It  is  very necessary for  us  to  know this  because 
some of the techniques we will use cancel a lot of the 
belief systems that are at the basis of human suffering. 
Consciousness  itself  is  like  a  movie  screen  upon 
which what is chariging is experienced. If we look at 
it,  we  will  see  that  all  experience  is  experience  of 
change. The movement we experience is  the coming 
and going, the ebbing and waning, and the flux. The 
reason  we  can  experience  that  which  changes  is 
because  it  is  being  experienced from  a  background 
that is  unchanging. It is  because the movie  screen is 
standing  still  that we  can  see  the  movement  of the 
movie.  Therefore,  what  changes  is  what  is  experi­
enced, and  it is  experienced in consciousness  itself, 
which has no exact location. 

The Functional Hypoglycemic 

Before explaining fear and anxiety as an emotional 

level of consciousness (the major source), it is impor­
tant to identify a frequent source of those emotions, 
which has a physical basis.A frequent source of anger 
and  other  negative  emotions  is  the  physiological 
problem  of  'functional  hypoglycemia'  Oow  blood 
sugar), which  is  associated  with  an  overreaction  to 
dietary sugar input. This is  also  termed 'hyperinsulin­
ism,' which is an overreaction to glucose and sucrose. 
The sudden drop in blood sugar can precipitate emo­

266 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

tional reactions of anger, rage, fear, shakiness, panic, or 
even· violence. 

The  diagnosis  can  be  made  clinically  by  simply 

stopping  all  sugar intake  and  noticing  the  disappear­
ance of the negative symptoms. It can be verified by a 
five-hour  glucose  tolerance  test.  In  a  normal  person, 
glucose levels first rise rapidly and then slowly subside. 
The  hypoglycemic  pattern,  however,  shows  a  rapid 
drop in blood glucose level, and the sudden drop may 
then  precipitate  mild  to  quite  severe  negative  emo­
tions or physical shaking, weakness, or even fainting. It 
may  also  result  in  a  craving  for  alcohol  or  sedative 
drugs. The  disorder  is  well  known  in  recovery  pro­
grams, such as Alcoholics Anonymous. A famous  book 
about  the  disorder  is  Sugar  Blues  by William  Duffy 
(1986). 

When prospective patients  called my office, I  told 
them  to  stop  ingesting  all  sugar (and  alcohol)  until  I 
saw them for their appointment. Over the years, twenty­
five  percent  of  the  patients  were  'cured'  (asympto­
matic)  by  the  time  I  saw  them.  Because  of the  high 
prevalence  of  this  clinical  disorder  and  its  various 
forms  of expression, it  is  worth investigating as  a con­
tributory  element  in  all  emotional  disorders.  It  can 
even be  the  trigger for  psychotic  episodes  as  well  as 
physical  violence.  Some  undiagnosed  persons  even 
end up in jail or prison for assault and other crimes of 
violence. It is a frequent cause of marital or other social 
disputes, family friction, and behavioral disorders. 

In the  clinic,  we  had  a  diagnostic  laboratory  and 
often did the five-hour glucose tolerance tests. By  the 
third or fourth hour, many patients developed negative 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

267 

emotional  reactions.  One  woman  suddenly  disrobed 
and ran down the sidewalk stark naked with the labo­
ratory director in his long white coat running after her, 
yelling "Stop!" She  kept on running wildly for  several 
blocks.  (Traffic  came  to  a  halt  at  the  wild,  frantic 
scene.) 

Fear  is  a  level  of consciousness  to  be  addressed 
where  it is,  not in  its  expression  and  extension  into 
the world-fear of this, fear of that-and not trying to 
handle it on the level of the particular but handling it 
instead  as  a  level  of consciousness. This  is  done  by 
becoming  aware  of  that  which  we  are,  which  is 
greater than the fear, and learning to disidentify with 
the emotion so we are not that. We are an overall field 
in which fear is being experienced. It becomes a small 
thing occurring within the  greater context in which 
we  become  aware  of  ourselves  as  that  which  we 
really are. 

One of the biggest obstacles to handling and letting 
go  of fear is  the fear  of fear  itself. We  will describe  a 
technique  that  disappears  the  fear  of fear.  Once  we 
are no longer afraid of fear,  it becomes a very simple 
matter. Is it not the fear of fear that is  the problem? A 
person is afraid of the fear, just as the person going to 
the  dentist is  afraid  of the  pain; it is  that initial  fear. 
When we begin to look at the nature of fear, we can 
see that the number of fears is endless; therefore, peo­
ple become victims and convinced that the source of 
fear is outside themselves. 

If people think the origination or source of fear is 
outside  themselves,  then  there  would  be  very  little 
they could do  about it. In fact, there  really is  nothing 

268 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

they could do about it. So  long as the belief continues 
that the source is  outside themselves, they will always 
be the victims of fear until they begin to realize that it 
is a present condition within themselves, and that they 
are the source of the fear they project onto the world. 
Of course, they are  sure  to  see  it 'out there' because 
they have just projected it out there. 

When we look at fear, we see how all pervasive it 

can be. If we realize  that fear  is  a  level of conscious­
ness, then we realize that from that level of conscious­
ness,  fear  can  be  attached  to  everything. Trying  to 
overcome particular fears  may have  a  certain limited 
value, but it does not change one as  a fearful  person, 
personality, or human being.The fear of a specific fear 
may be clinically valuable, and it may be of practical 
use in one's life, but it does not alter who one is. The 
conditions  of  fear  can  be  changed  so  that  one  no 
longer feels  like  a  small  self that is  powerless and at 
the effect of being the victim of fear itself. 

Fear can be like a preftx that gets attached to any­
thing.We can see from the Map of Consciousness that 
Fear is at consciousness level  100, indicating that it is 
a negative emotion, as  shown by the direction of the 
arrow. We  see its relative  power in this mathematical 
model that shows the calibrated energies of the differ­
ent ftelds.As we go up from the negative emotions of 
30,50, and 75 into the positive emotions beginning at 
200, we  see  that their power, from  the viewpoint of 
physics, actually increases. 

As we address the energy fteld of Fear, we begin to 
realize  that being fearful  can attach  to  anything  and 
everything in our lives. There  is  nothing  in  our total 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

269 

experience as a human being to which fear cannot be 
attached. We  love our mother, and up comes the fear 
of "What  if we  lose  her?" We  love  our body  and  up 
comes the  fear  of death  or sickness. We  love  money 
and up comes the fear  of loss or of being accused of 
being greedy. No matter what we think of, fear can be 
attached to it. We  love our automobile and up comes 
the fear of an accident. A fearful  person attaches fear 
to  everything; therefore, everything  that  comes  into 
the  mind is  coming into  an  energy field  of fear  and 
thus gets colored with fear. There is even a fear of life 
itself, as shown by the song, '''Fraid of living and 'fraid 
of dying."  In  other words, this  energy field  has  now 
contaminated everything. 

If we are  the source of that energy field, then all 

our experience comes into the field of fear, and every­
thing  in  our  lives  can  become  fearful. The  future  is 
fearful: old age, getting older, what is going to happen 
to the body, what is going to happen to my finances, 
what is going to happen to my relationships, what is 
going  to  happen to  my family,  what is  going  to  hap­
pen to  my bank account, what is going to happen to 
my  country,  and  what  is  going  to  happen  to  the 
world? 

People who develop global fear will tell you about 
their  fear  of  nuclear  annihilation,  or  intergalactic 
wars,  or  meteors,  or  cataclysmic  'end  times'.  The 
expansion of the fear does not change the fact that it 
is  still  just  fear.  Glamorizing  it  and  making  it  sound 
dramatic does not change that it is just fear. The fears 
of intergalactic war, human demolition, and the expi­
ration  of the  human  race  are  no  different  from  the 

270 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

child's  fear  of the  dark  or his  fear  that  a  dog  might 
bite  him.  Experientially, fear  is  always  just the  same 
emotion. 

Characteristic  of  all  of  this  is  the  energy  field 
called Fear. Fear of 'what' is really immaterial. We have 
to  learn  to  look  away  from  the  thoughts  and  look 
instead at the feeling. We  actually have to look below 
the feeling  to the  energy field  out of which the feel­
ing  is  originating  and then  learn how to  handle  this 
energy field. When we do this, we lose our fear of fear, 
and as that happens, we begin to learn how to handle 
fear directly. It is an extremely simple thing to handle 
once  we  are  familiar  with  some  rather  easy  tech­
niques. 

The  world  pretty  much  runs  people  with  fear 
because  their  personal  lives  are  also  predominantly 
run by fear. But once we have learned a way to avoid 
getting  cornered  by fear,  we  begin  to  transcend  the 
world as well as transcend being a victim because the 
world can threaten us only by fear. If they cut off our 
bank  account,  conduct  an  audit,  run· away  from  us, 
leave  us, or fife  us, the gun at our head is  always  the 
same  gun-the gun  of fear. There  can be  the fear  of 
losing a part of the body-there is no end to the num­
ber of fears, but there is an end to fearfulness  and of 
being a victim of fear. 

We  will learn how to lose our fear of fear, how to 
enjoy the process, and how to really start feeling good 
about  ourselves  when  we  realize  that  we  are  no 
longer the victim, the worm that is at the effect of this 
all-pervasive fearfulness. The problem is  not fear itself 
but the  energy field  of fearfulness. We  can  begin  to 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

271 

see  that  we  are  in  control  of it  because  we  are  the 
source of it. We  start with admitting the truth that "I 
am the source of my fearfulness." We know that in a 
different mood, a fearful thing is no longer fearful. We 
might say about the thing we fear, "I'm afraid of that," 
but when we are accompanied by someone else, or in 
a different mood, such as a humorous one, and we are 
having a good time laughing, then the thing no longer 
engenders  fear,  so  the  source  of fear  is  not  out in 
the world. 

There  is  no way of overcoming one's fear of the 

world because there is no way the world can be con­
trolled to end one's fears, nor can fears be overcome 
by  changing  society,  by  changing  the  law,  or  by 
changing the rules. The source of fearfulness is with­
in oneself. 

Picture a big event. There are two aspects-one is 
the event itself, and the second is how we feel about 
it.  Having  more  police  at  the  event  might  make  us 
feel better, but, in fact, where are the police going to 
be while our apartment is being robbed? At the other 
end  of  town,  naturally.  Therefore,  our  handling  of 
fear  is  really  up  to ourself. It comes  out of our will­
ingness  to  own that we  are  the  source  of that fear, 
which  is  occurring  within  our  own  consciousness. 
Therefore, we want to  address it where it is  actually 
being experienced. 

Most people experience fear in a somewhat phys­
ical way, so the first thing to do about a fearful  expe­
rience is eliminate paying any attention to thought. A 
fearful  feeling  will  engender  literally  millions  of 
thoughts. There is no end to fearful thoughts because 

272 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

they are coming out of the energy field  of fear itself, 
which  generates  an  endless  series  of  thoughts. 
Clinically  speaking,  handling  the  specific  thoughts 
themselves  has  a  limited  value,  and  the  fearfulness 
merely generates more thoughts later on, so we want 
to use a technique that will handle fear itself. 

A  person might  just picture  something fearful  in 
their  life,  or  something  fearful  that  they  expect  to 
happen or has happened, or they can just fantasize  a 
fearful  experience, such as  being tied to  the railroad 
track  with  a  locomotive  bearing  down  on  them. As 
they look at what is  being experienced, they will see 
when they look  past  the  thought, it  is  being  experi­
enced first  in the  body. They may notice  a  tenseness 
in the stomach muscles, a queasy feeling in the stom­
ach, shakiness in the arms and legs, or a dryness in the 
mouth. Some  people  have  intestinal  cramps  or diffi­
culty breathing. Whatever it is, they look within them­
selves  to  see  what  is  actually  being  experienced. 
Radical  truth  means  what  is  being  experienced, not 
what one is actually thinking about it or the concepts 
that  one  is  projecting  onto  the  experience; it  is  not 
the labeling of it but what one is  literally experienc­
ing within oneself. 

The technique is  to  let go  of resisting the experi­
encing  of what is  literally  being  experienced. Let  go 
of resisting the dryness of the mouth. Let  it be there 
and welcome it. Let go of resisting the flip-flop feeling 
in  the  stomach  and  the  trembling  in  the  arms  and 
legs. When  we  do  this,  we  are  focused  away  from 
thought about what is being experienced.We fully let 
go  and  surrender being  those  sensations. The  letting 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

273 

go is like being the willow tree in the wind. 

The ancient wisdom of Taoism states that the oak 

tree, which  resists  the  wind, is  susceptible  to  break­
ing, and the willow tree, which bends with the wind, 
survives.  Like  the  willow  tree,  we  bend  with  the 
incoming experience. We  let it be, blend with it, and 
welcome  it. We  say, "Let's  have  more  of it." As  we  do 
that, we will discover, much to our surprise, that there 
is  a  limited amount of that sensation. It is  as  though 
the amount of fear we have is limited in quantity. How 
can this be? It is  as  though this fear is  like a pressure 
tank that contains all the suppressed fear we have had 
throughout  our  lifetime,  starting  in  our  childhood. 
There is all the fear that we could not allow ourselves 
to  experience  or  express,  or  were  not  allowed  to 
express. We  were  not allowed  to  have  that  emotion. 
For  example,  a  man  in  military  service  was  not 
allowed  to  express  the  fearfulness  because  it  was 
thought to be unmanly or showed cowardice, so the 
fear got suppressed, repressed, and pushed down out 
of awareness. 

Fears we were not aware of have come up by the 
thousands in our lifetime. The fear comes up and we 
unwittingly  brace  our  back. The  fear  is  just  pushed 
out of awareness, or we drum our fmgers on the desk. 
The fear is so qUickly suppressed that we do not even 
realize it was there.As the years go by, we have accu­
mulated  energy  of this  fear. The  energy  behind  this 
fear increases in pressure, and when it reaches a  cer­
tain point, it is  as  though a  needle has  reached a  red 
line  on the  dial,  and the  pressure  of this fearfulness 
now begins to express itself. It spills out and over into 

274 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

our  experience  and  begins  to  color  it.  If we  do  not 
examine it, we think that this fear is coming from the 
world, and we blame the world for it. We think that it 
is a fearful experience happening out there. Little  do 
we realize that it is  merely our own fearfulness that is 
being projected out into the world. 

Then we own this source of the fear, which is our 
own accumulated fearfulness. We  start to welcome it 
and  look  forward  to  the  opportunity  to  allow  this 
fearfulness to run out.The basic release from fear is by 
surrender at great depth.The sensations and the inner 
experience  of fear  itself remain the  same, no  matter 
what we think we fear. If somebody holds a  shotgun 
to our heart and says, "Give me all your money," what 
are we going to experience? We  are going to  experi­
ence the dry mouth, weakness in the knees, and that 
old, familiar  flip-floppy  feeling  in  the  stomach. If an 
enemy  tank  rolls  up  to  our  house,  knocks  it  over, 
rotates the gun barrel, and points it right at our fore­
head,  what  are  we  going  to  experience? The  same 
thing  happens if somebody holds  a  mouse  over our 
head.We are going to experience a dry mouth, queasi­
ness in our stomach, cramps in our intestines, and that 
shaky feeling in our muscles. 

All we ever have to handle is those sensations, and 
with experiencing this  technique, we will learn that 
all we ever have to handle is what we are experienc­
ing within consciousness itself, whether it is localized 
within  the  body  or elsewhere. After  meditation  and 
working with this technique, we will notice that this 
experience is actually happening in a general and dif­
fuse  everywhereness. The  phenomena of the  queasy 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

275 

muscles,  the  flip-flop  in  the  stomach,  and  the  dry 
mouth  are  being  experienced  in  a  vague,  diffuse 
everywhereness. We  just allow the  experience  to be 
present without resisting  it. Because  we  are  focused 
on that, the fear begins to diminish because we are no 
longer paying attention to the thoughts. The thoughts 
themselves are engendering further fear. 

If we are very busy with this technique of just let­
ting go  of resisting  the  fear,  we  are  now focused  on 
the  energy  field  itself.  Behind  this  fearfulness  is  an 
energy, and we are letting go of resisting the progres­
sive  release  and  discharge  of that  energy.  By  doing 
this, we  lose  the fear  of fear.  It is  no  longer an  awe­
some  terror  that  awakens  us  in  the  middle  of  the 
night.  It  is  nothing  but  an  inner  emotional  experi­
ence, the sensations of which can be easily handled. 
We  can  ask  ourselves,  "Truly,  can  I  handle  a  dry 
mouth? Of course, I can." 

Another technique to eliminate the negative emo­
tions is to let go of their associated mental images that 
attract  and  amplify  associated  emotions. Just  refuse 
the image and cancel the temptation to indulge in it. 
While doing research and experimenting with this 

particular technique, I had an experience that demon­
strates  one  of the  principles  being  described. I  had 
had a lifetime fear of heights which was so severe that 
when I  went to  visit  the  Grand  Canyon for  the  first 
time,  I  literally  could  not  walk  within  one  hundred 
feet  of the  edge. It created that panicky feeling  even 
when I  saw somebody else  get near the  edge. I  was 
using  this  technique whenever I  could and enjoying 
the progress I was making with it, but I had never got­

276 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ten  around  to  working  on  my fear  of heights. I  had 
been working on fear from all its other origins within 
my  experience. The  next  time  I  went  back  to  the 
Grand  Canyon  about  two  years  later,  much  to  my 
amazement, I  could walk  up to within about twenty 
feet  of the  edge  before  the  tight feeling  occurred in 
the  stomach  again.  I  continued  to  utilize  this  tech­
nique over the next year or two and again went back 
to  revisit  the  Canyon. Much  to  my  surprise, I  could 
walk  right  up  to  the  very edge. Subsequently, I  later 
went up in a hot air balloon without any anxiety. I was 
so pleased at this demonstration of the principle that 
what I had been releasing was the accumulated pres­
sure and energy of all that fear from a lifetime. Similar 
to a pressure tank, as  it released itself, there was less 
and less to spill over into life experiences. 

The letting go of resisting  is  so  effective  because 

resistance  traps  us  into  a  certain  state  of conscious­
ness;  resistance  is  within.  Fear  is  a  negative  energy 
that calibrates at 100, and traps us in the field. We can­
not  get  beyond  it  so  we  become  the  victim  of our 
own fears  unless  we own that we  are  the source  of 
them.As long as we rationalize and say that the source 
of fear is 'out there', we cannot overcome it. Once we 
begin to own that we are the experiencer, that we are 
the one who sets up the way in which we experience 
things, then we become the one who is master of the 
situation.  Our  self-esteem  becomes  affected. We  are 
no longer the one who is the victim or subject to fear. 
We  are something other than the fear. Fear is  nothing 
but an experience in consciousness, and we no longer 
have to give it reality by labeling it as  a fear of some­

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

277 

thing, which can be an endless process. 

Fearfulness is  attached to everything in the world 
by fearful people. Changing the world will not handle 
it. A person can be terribly afraid in a very safe  situa­
tion and not at all afraid in a situation that is hypothet­
ically very dangerous. For example, a person is  being 
mugged, which is one thing, and then there is the fear 
of being mugged, which is something else.The fear of 
being  mugged  is  not  the  same  as  actually  being 
mugged. It is  quite possible to have very unfortunate 
circumstances occur in one's life  and not experience 
fear at all. In fact, one might even experience that one 
is merely the witness of the phenomenon. 

Such a thing happened to me when I came face to 
face  with a very large  rattlesnake on top of a  nearby 
mountain. As  I was about to step into a cabin, a giant 
rattlesnake  was  coiled up  right in front  of the  door­
way, and as I lifted my foot to step over him, his head 
snapped  back, his  tongue  flickered  out,  and  he  was 
poised to strike me. In that instant, there was a flash 
of fearful thought, and then the thought that I  could 
get a club and hit it, or I could run, or I could yell for 
help. I did not have a gun, but somebody might shoot 
it.  All  the  self-protective  thoughts  that  social  con­
sciousness had programmed me with were present. 

Happily,  and  luckily  for  me  or  I  would  not  be 
telling  about  this,  I  had  learned  this  technique.  I 
instantly realized that my life frankly depended on my 
utilization of it, so I automatically went into this exact 
technique. I automatically let go of wanting to do any­
thing about the fear,  of wanting to handle or change 
anything  about  it. Instead, I  went into  my inner Self 

278 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

and just allowed the inner experience to release itself 
without any resistance. I  welcomed  even  more  of it 
because somehow, when we really get into the expe­
rience  of our own inner consciousness, we  see  that 
our survival depends on this  and has all  along. I  saw 
that  my  survival  really  depended  on  the  excellence 
with which I let go, surrendered to God, and released 
and  let  go  of resisting  the  experience. As  I  did,  the 
fearful thoughts. instantly disappeared, and I felt a pro­
found state of peace settle on both the snake and me. 

It was as if I had become the witness-not the wit­
ness  confined  to  this  body,  but  the  witness  in  con­
sciousness, which seemed to have no dimension. This 
formless  dimension was then the experiencer of the 
presence  of  a  state  of  peacefulness. This  profound 
state  was  of  such  power  that  it  prevailed  over  the 
consciousness  of both the snake and the personality 
of this person telling you about this.The snake looked 
at  me  with  interest,  probably  not  having  seen  a 
human being in his whole life, much less a foot away, 
and  I  looked  at the  rattlesnake  with  great  curiosity 
and thought of him as  a  brother. The two of us were 
included  in  the  oneness  of  this  space  of  our  own 
beingness together in a state of extreme intimacy. Out 
of it came a sort of inner joyfulness, and I felt love for 
the  snake  arise  out of the  field  from which fear  had 
been removed. 

In  looking  at  the  Map  of Consciousness, we  can 
track what happened.The snake would have instantly 
sensed  the  fear,  which  has  a  negative  energy  field, 
along  with  my  anger  and  desire  to  strike  at  it. 
However,  his  responses  through  his  energy  system 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

279 

were  so  fast  that  the  strike  would  have  happened 
before  I  could  have  moved  my  shin  out of the  way. 
Instead, because  of the  severe  threat  of the  circum­
stances, I really, really let go. Did I ever! I moved right 
through  the  willingness  to  let  go,  right  through  the 
acceptance, love, and joy, and right into a state of pro­
. found  peace. If we  calibrate  the  energy field  of that 
experience, it started out at 100, but almost instantly, 
it  moved  up  to  600. Then  a  Presence  prevailed-an 
Infinite,  profoundly  still  Presence  whose  essential 
nature is one of peace, whose power is infmite-that 
controlled  the  whole  experience.  Thus,  both  the 
snake and I transcended fear, and we moved to a time­
less  silence. The  snake was as  though enchanted. We 
looked  at  each  for  minutes~ and  I  was  reluctant  to 
break  the  spell  by  leaving. The  snake  then  slithered 
away and never rattled its tail. 

This is valuable because it illustrates the falsity of 
another one of the mind's belief systems that we have 
to  learn to  release, which is  the  idea that fear  is  the 
source  of  our  safety. We  will  notice  that  the  mind 
seems to worship fear as  though it is  some kind of a 
demigod. The mind has a program that says, "The rea­
son I'm alive  is  due to my fears.  I  am alive  because  I 
allow fear  to  decide what I  am going  to  do." A  little 
introspection  will  show  that  this  belief  system  is 
going  on. A  person  says,  "Well,  if I  wasn't  afraid  of 
being poor in myoId age, I wouldn't get insurance. If 
I wasn't afraid of an automobile  accident, I wouldn't 
drive  safely."  So  the  person  begins  to  ascribe  the 
source  of their  aliveness,  the  source  of their  life,  to 
fear, which is the god of their life. They really begin to 

280 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

worship fear. 

We  can see from the above example that just the 
opposite  is  true.  What  insures  our  survival  is  the 
absence  of fear  and  its  replacement  by caution  and 
realistic common sense.We have managed to survive in 
spite  of our fears, not because  of them. We  can make 
decisions based on rational choice, on our knowledge, 
and on value coming from the beingness of that which 
we really are without fear entering the picture at all.All 
day long we make decisions  based just on our aware­
ness of reality, with no fear particularly involved. Fear is 
not necessary.There is the idea that fear is good for us, 
that it is beneficial and has all kinds of hidden, mysteri­
ous values. People will look back and rationalize  how 
fear got them to do this and do that, and all I can say is, 
"Too  bad." Too  bad they did  not do  it out of love  for 
themselves  or for their fellow  human beings. Too  bad 
that they did not do it out of love for life itself, love for 
their own aliveness, and love for their body.Why not do 
things for our body out of love for it instead of out of 
fear of the consequences? Why not keep it healthy and 
happy because we love  and value  it, not because we 
are afraid of a heart attack or something else? 

There is  another technique for letting go of more 
of this fear,  which  I  call "the worst-case  scenario." If 
we follow fears  and ask, "Why am I afraid of that?" we 
will see that it leads to another fear. Why are we afraid 
of driving  a  car? We  might have  an  accident. Why are 
we  afraid  of  an  accident?  Because  we  might  get 
injured. What if we get injured? Then we might suffer 
pain, and so on. We will find  that every fear ultimately 
leads to the fear of death, the fear of the body's dying. 

W 0  R R Y,  FE A R,  AND  A N X lET Y 

281 

It will lead to the fear of whether other people like us 
or agree with us. If we look at fear and keep asking our­
selves what fear does that bring up, and what fear is the 
basis of that, we fmally get to the worst-case scenario. 
For example, let us say  that our fmancial  fears  are 
that we will totally run out of money, have no place to 
live,  no  money for food  or clothing, and that we will 
end  up  semi-naked  somewhere  on a  street  corner in 
the  cold  with  no  place  to  go,  and  no  medical  help. 
What we do is constantly let go of resisting the feeling 
of this  and  picture  the  worst possible  thing  that  can 
happen to us, such as  ending up in the poor farm  or 
sitting on the street corner as a bag lady or a bagman. 
We then allow ourselves to picture the worst possible 
scenario-there we are with our bag next to us, sitting 
on the cold street corner at midnight, friendless. 

We  imagine  whatever  the  worst  possible  fear 
could  be  and  continue  the  practice.  If we  will  go 
within ourselves and keep  letting go of resisting the 
inner experience  of what is  coming up, pretty soon 
the fear of the worst scenario will run out. If we con­
tinue  this  practice  long  enough,  eventually  we  will 
finally  sit down and handle 'the biggie', which is piC­
turing  ourself in the  casket with everybody walking 
by it. That is the worst scenario that most people can 
visualize-physical death. 

There  is  the  belief that we are  the  material  body, 
and that is all there is to us. Sooner or later we come to 
that fear,  and when we do, we sit with it in the  same 
way as we sit with any other fear. We  let go  of death, 
which is a label, a thought, and a concept. We have no 
experience  of  the  truth  of  that,  only  our  fantasies, 

282 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

thoughts, and beliefs; therefore, we have  to label it as 
only a fantasy in our mind. What people actually expe­
rience as they picture that and let go of resisting those 
feelings and sensations is a very surprising thing.When 
they have gone through the process and become that 
which is  greater than the entire experience, they real­
ize that they have survived the worst possible scenario. 
First, I imagined being a bag person. By the time the 
fear ran out, I enjoyed i~.  I thought it would actually be 
fun to just do what I wanted to do-hang out with the 
people' I wanted to talk: with, not have to go to work or 
pay any bills, and have no health or automobile insur­
ance  premiums  to  pay.  It  would  be  okay  because  it 
would  be  from  choice  and  not  from  victimhood.  It 
would  just  be  a  different  experience  that  is  in  great 
contrast to the rest of my life. 

From  choice, there is  no fear;  the  fear  disappears. 
The  worst  thing  that  can  happen  is  to  end  up  on  a 
street  corner  and  live  that  kind  of life,  but  the  fear 
about it is gone. I may not choose that kind of life, but 
if it  should happen, it  is  not filled  with fear.  I  am no 
longer run by the fear of that, so I do not have to lie in 
bed at  night worrying about what would happen if I 
run  out  of money  some  day.  No  matter  how  much 
money one has, that fear  is  present. The  thought that 
we  can earn more  and more money and pile  it up  in 
the  bank is  futile.  I  know somebody who  was  worth 
sixty million dollars, ended up bankrupt, and had to sell 
off his personal possession to pay his bills. 

Could  sixty  million  dollars  protect  us  from  that 
which we fear?  Of course not. Money will not protect 
us  at all, nor will barricades, putting  six locks  on our 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

283 

doors,  or  hiring  more  police. The  only  protection  is 
owning that wt: are the source of our own experience, 
that we are the master of it, that we can handle it, and 
that we are greater than it. 

The mind always tries to justify our fear, of course. 
It says, "Well, there are a lot of muggings; therefore, my 
fear  is  justified." Why is  there  such a  thing as  justified 
fear? Who needs it? Why not walk home out of choice 
in a way that we know is not going to bring on such an 
attack? Why not out of loving oneself enough? Why not 
out of just enjoying life and valuing it to the point that 
we do not want to risk it, out of choice? 

Survival  does  not  depend  on  the  fear  of  being 
mugged or robbed. It depends on pre-choice, which is 
made by a mind that is  not fearful. Because of the 'not 
fearfulness' ,I am alive today. It was not being afraid that 
held back the rattlesnake from striking me when it was 
really  only inches  away.  It was  due  to  the loss  of the 
fear and the letting go of it. It is  possible to be in very 
severe, dangerous situations (such as World War II, etc.) 
and experience only joy, happiness, and trust in those 
circumstances. I have walked through a  crowd of cut­
throats who would have readily attacked a person who 
was holding· fear and done it with happy, gleeful smiles 
on t1}eir  faces. They 'got off on it' when a  guy like me 
walked  right  through  them  while  they were  holding 
their intimidating guns, chains, and knives. Had I come 
from  fear,  they  would  have  challenged  that  boldness 
and  attacked  me.  Safety  came  from  letting  go  of the 
fear.  Without  fear  or  bravado,  there  was  nothing  for 
them to playoff of emotionally. 

Letting go  of the worst-case scenario  is  extremely 

284 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

beneficial. As  we  do  this, we will  become  aware  that 
something has been setting up the fear within us. Now 
that we have lost our fear of fear, when it arises, we just 
walk  around with it.  One  time  I  walked  around with 
fear  for  two  solid weeks. With  that trembling  electric 
feeling  running  through  the  body,  I  went  about  my 
business  and  just  kept  letting  the  fear  run because  I 
realized it would run out. However, as  we do that, we 
may realize that there is another source underlying the 
original fear to begin with, which is guilt. 

Now we begin to see the value  of the work that 
the world calls spiritual consciousness or something 
similar. We can see the benefit of techniques such as 
concentrating on the value of forgiving. In forgiving 
ourselves and other human beings and turning over 
any judgment to God, we begin to find that-by letting 
go  of condemning ourselves  and others, the uncon­
scious  guilt  begins  to  alleviate  fear  since  fear  was 
held  in  mind  because  we  unconsciously  expected 
retaliatory return of our attacks. We  expect revenge 
and counterattack. Every negative or hostile thought 
that we  hold  about others engenders our own fear­
fulness  because  on  the  psychic  or  mental  plane, 
which  is  invisible  to  the  naked  eye, it  is  as  though 
we  are  building up for ourselves  that which threat­
ens  to  come  back  to  us. We  learn  that  fearfulness 
begins to diminish as we let go of our anger, hostility, 
criticisms,  and  thoughts  that  condemn  others. We 
learn  the  value  of  letting  go  of  the  thoughts  that 
make  other  people  wrong. We  begin  to  value  and 
love  them for their beingness, for what they are. We 
begin to see ourselves as different, and, therefore, we 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

285 

begin  to see others as  different. We  become willing 
to forgive, forget, and overlook. 

As  a  result, we  start to  see  that  all  the  things we 
condemned  in  others  are  really  just  expressions  of 
their humanness. What we have been condemning in 
ourselves  and  in  everybody  else  is  the  humanness, 
the innocence of the little  child within that believed 
everything it heard while growing up. The conscious­
ness  of the  child  is  innocent, is  it  not?  It loves  and 
trusts its parents. It loves its mother. Therefore, the 
innocence  of  the  child  gets  programmed.  It  is  the 
innocent child that believes everything it is  told by 
the  parents,  teachers,  and  the  political/social  pro­
gramming  that  occurs  via  television  and  the  belief 
systems of the country. 

Who  or what bought all  the belief systems  in our 
mind? Who bought what we believe?  It was the mind 
of the  innocent within because  that  innocent  child's 
mind,  the  nature  of  consciousness  itself,  has  not 
changed since we were born.That which is reading this 
right  now is  the  innocent  consciousness  of the  child 
saying, "I believe this. I take it within myself."The inno­
cent child never dies; that innocence is still present.We 
see in today's world the actions of ignorant, susceptible 
young men who are being programmed to hate (para­
doxically  by  religion).  They  then  believe  hate  and 
killing the innocent are 'good' or even 'holy' . 

We begin to see that intrinsic innocence and realize 
that all the things we have  ever learned which ended 
up being wrong were bought out of the intrinsic state 
of not knowing the truth  and also  from  learning  that 
which was not the truth. Therefore, we are  willing  to 

286 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

let go of our condemnation of others and ourselves.We 
are beginning to own our own innocence and that of 
others. It is misfortunate and perhaps regretful that the 
misinformation came into the innocent mind. 

We might look at the mind as  the hardware of the 
computer and its  belief systems  as  the  software. Can 
the five-year-old  child question the political system he 
hears described in his kindergarten from his fellow stu­
dents, his parents, or his grandparents? We can see that 
it is  from  his 'not knowingness'. It is  out of the  inno­
cence  of his  'not knowingness' that he  believes  what 
he believes.As a result, we are willing to forgive others, 
and instead of condemning them, we understand them. 

From  this  understanding  develops  a  certain  com­

passion.A compassionate person has no fears. What is 
there to fear in a compassionate world inasmuch as we 
are the source of our own experience and our compas­
sion when we  own it  back within  ourselves? We  see 
our own innocence and the innocence of other beings 
and  have  the  experience  of a  compassionate, loving 
world. No longer do we walk around fearfully because 
we are  no longer creating it within ourselves. We  see 
that we were  the source  of our fears. The  world was 
never the source of our fear; we were. Having let go of 
creating fear and propagating it through endless guilt, 
which  comes  about  through  endless  judgments  that 
social  conditioning  has  thrust  upon  us,  the  uncon­
scious  guilt diminishes. The letting go  of unconscious 
guilt progresses outside of our awareness. 

Every time we decide to stop condemning a person 
and  instead  try to  understand  him, our own  store  of 
unconscious guilt goes down. In the unconscious, it is 

W 0  R R Y,  FE A R,  AND  A N X lET Y 

287 

an eye  for  an eye  and a  tooth for  a  tooth. If we wish 
that somebody would drop dead, what do you suppose 
its  equal is  in our unconscious mind? That we should 
drop dead. We  do not think that our thought about "If 
only  so-and-so  would  drop  dead"  has  anything  to  do 
with our fears of a heart attack, but, of course, they do. 
As we let go of wishing for other people to drop dead, 
we will find, curiously enough, that our fear and obses­
sion that we  might or will get a  coronary and  all the 
dietary  precautions  that  go  with  that,  will  diminish. 
Instead, we are  very peaceful about the whole  thing. 
When we go, we go. If we stay, we stay. Big deal! 

What we value is life, and we no longer focus on the 
potential ending of that life; therefore, we come into a 
different  experience  of the  experiencing  of  life  and 
who we are. We  are that in which this experiencing is 
happening. Then,  as  the  classic  ox-herding  pictures 
depict, instead  of being  dragged  about with  bleeding 
knees and rumpled clothes against our will by the ox 
of fear,  we can now tie  this  ox to  a  tree  because  we 
have located the culprit. Having let go of our fear of the 
ox, we now become the master. We  get on top of the 
ox, and  the  ox becomes  tame; we  are  the  master. We 
have  identified with that which we really  are  and are 
no longer the victim. 

Victimhood  comes  out  of  unconsciousness.  It 
means being unaware of this game setup that has been 
going on within our minds. Merely becoming aware of 
this means that we are already out of it. By the time you 
have  finished  reading  this,  you  have  gotten  up  from 
being the victim; you are  already tying  this  ox to  the 
tree. As  we  practice  these  techniques  that have  been 

288 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

described, we will soon be sitting on top of the ox. 

When  fear  comes  along,  we  welcome  it  and  say, 
"Great! What an opportunity to let go of more of that," 
because  by  now,  we  are  feeling  the  benefit  of  the 
decrease in the fears we have had our whole lifetime. 
Little do people realize the extent of the fears they are 
holding  until  they  begin  to  disappear,  and  then  it  is 
mind-boggling. We  say, "I  never realized  1 was  such  a 
fearful  human  being:'  This  is  perhaps  more  easily 
understood by referring to the Map  of Consciousness 
so we can see how the energy fields  relate to the way 
we experience the world. 

Mind is so powerful that the way it holds our expe­
rience literally determines our experience. Fearfulness 
creates  a  certain  view  of  the  world  and  tends  to 
become  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  Recent  university 
research, as well as our own research, shows that what 
one holds in mind tends to manifest within one's expe­
rience of the world. The world of our own experience 
then becomes the external representation of what we 
have been holding in mind, so our life is really a world 
of mirrors. What we are actually seeing and experienc­
ing is  a projection of our own level of consciousness. 
This is difficult to believe and fully grasp, but to give us 
a glimpse of it is a whole field of study in itself.The sage 
Ramana Maharshi taught that the world you see (per­
ception)  does  not  even  exist  and  is  illusory  (the 
Buddha's "Maya"). 

On the Map  of Consciousness, let us compare the 
level  of consciousness  with  its  emotion, our view  of 
the world, and how this would give us a view of God. 
At  the  bottom  of the  Map  is  a  negative  energy  field 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

289 

called Guilt that calibrates  at  a  power of 30. It is  the 
world  of  self-hatred,  self-destruction,  and  a  person 
who is  guilt-ridden. They see the world as  one of sin 
and  suffering, which  indicates  what  kind  of God  in 
that  context  would  rule  over  a  world  of  endless 
suffering  and  sin. The  consequences  of sin  in  the 
collective  consciousness  field  would  be  that  God  is 
our  ultimate  destroyer.  He  punishes  with  earth­
quakes,  volcanic  eruptions,  floods,  pestilence,  and 
more. God has created the world of sin and suffering 
in  which  we  are  destroyed,  and  our  soul  is  thrown 
into hell forever. That is the worst possible scenario. 

As  one's consciousness rises to the energy field  of 
Apathy  at  50, which  is  the  level  of hopelessness  and 
loss  of energy, the world and life  in it are seen as  rela­
tively  hopeless. As  a  result,  there  are  some  famous 
philosophers  who  said  that  man  is  nothing,  God  is 
dead,  and  this  is  a  hopeless  world. The  view  of God 
from  that level  is  that  God is  dead, or at  least  cruelly 
indifferent to suffering. 

If we raise our level of consciousness and advance 
our awareness, we then move up to the level of Grief, 
which  offers  a  negative  view  of the  world  and  our­
selves.  The  emotions  are  regret,  loss,  feelings  of 
despondency, and being  dispirited. A person holding 
the  energy field  of Grief sees this  as  a  sad world  as 
they walk down the street. When this person looks at 
older people, they see how sad it is that they are old. 
When  they  look  at  children,  they  think  how  sad  is 
what these poor, innocent children are going to have 
to experience in life.When they open the newspaper, 
they see the sadness of all that goes on in the world. 

290 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

The kind of God that would fit that sadness would be 
a  God who  ignores  them. Out  of this, the  person  is 
worthless,  so  they  say,  "I  am  just  a  worm,  and  God 
couldn't possibly have any interest in me. If He exists 
at all, He would just be a God who ignores me." 

What  about  the  fearful  person  who  holds  the 
energy field of Fear? We  see that they are the creator 
of that, the  owner, and  the  source. The  emotions  of 
worry, anxiety, panic, and the deflation of self-esteem 
lead them to  see  this  as  a  frightening  world. As  they 
walk  down  the  street, they  see  danger  everywhere. 
They open the newspaper with alarm and read about 
bankruptcy and  murder. They walk  down  the  street 
and  see  automobile  accidents  and  the  potential  for 
starvation.The God of a frightening field of conscious­
. ness would be a very punitive one who really sort of 
hates them and throws them into the world of an end­
less  nightmare. The  creator of such a  nightmare  is  a 
very  punitive  God  of  revenge  and  retaliation  and 
becomes the punisher. 

As  we move up into Desire at 125, the area of the 
solar plexus, there are craving, wantingness, and what 
makes  Sammy  run,  and  there  is  no  satisfying  it.  No 
matter what the person gets, it is not enough. The mil­
lionaire has fifty million dollars and is going for sixty 
million. He has sixty and is going for seventy. He never 
gets to the end of the road for there is  no end. When 
he is  old, his fmgernails  are long, he lives on a yacht, 
he  is  paranoid  and  thinks  the  world  is  against  him, 
and he does not understand why he cannot fmd hap­
piness. But happiness is at level 500, not at 125. 

The  person  is  trapped  by  wanting  and  craving 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

291 

more  and more  and therefore sees the world as  frus­
trating.  If one  is  always  wanting,  then  the  world  is 
always holding back from that person. As  one looks at 
the  jewelry-store  display  cases,  that  cravingness 
comes  out-one  wants,  wants,  wants  those  jewels. 
They  want  the  wantingness. If they  get  the  jewels, 
they will feel a satisfaction but not happiness.There is 
a temporary satisfaction, but what kind of God would 
hold back from a  person what they desire? Then the 
person feels  separated from God, if there is  a  God at 
all. There is the person, and then there is God, but the 
two of them have no relationship. 

The  exasperation  of  this  frustrating  world  of 
desire  leads  to  anger,  resentment, hatred, grievance; 
war,  and  murder. There  is  the  overexpansion  of the 
angry person, which shows  in the  protrusion of the 
blood vessels, and the  angry animal within flares  up 
with anger. The  angry person sees this  as  a  competi­
tive  world. When somebody opens  up another used­
car lot next to him, he is angry and thinks the person 
is going to take his business away. He has not moved 
up  to  a  world of cooperation which knows  that the 
more  there  are  used-car  lots  nearby,  the  greater  the 
business because they draw people from everywhere. 
But he would not even think of cooperating; instead, 
he thinks of competition and becomes polarized. It is 
he  against  them. Therefore,  he  sees  a  competitive 
world and a  retaliatory God who, out of angriness, is 
very punishing, retaliatory, and seeks revenge. "I  am a 
jealous, vengeful God who will get you. I'm out to get 
you," so God is his enemy, out to get him. How can he 
relax and reach any kind of awareness in that kind of 

292 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

angry energy field? 

From Anger, we move up to pridefulness. Pride at 

level 175 carries with it the downside of denial, arro­
gance, and contempt.The process in consciousness is 
one of being inflated. This person lives  in a  world of 
status. When he walks down the same  city street, he 
sees  not  only  your  Cadillac,  but  also  the  year  and 
model. I  did not even realize  they came  in models. I 
thought a Caddy was a Caddy. No sir, I have discovered 
that  there  are  different  models  of Cadillac-I  forget 
their  names, but  whatever  they  are,  one  has  more 
status than the other-so the  interest  of that person 
in  other human beings  is  in their position. "Oh, he's 
president  of  so-and-so,"  or,  "He's  only  a  blue-collar 
worker." It is not the money but the status that money 
gives them. 

What kind of a  God can that person see from the 
level of pridefulness? There are probably two options. 
Because of denial and intellectual arrogance, one can 
say  that the  left  brain  denies that there  is  a  God, or, 
one  can say  that  their position is  the  right  one, and 
therefore everybody else  is  wrong; thus, they end up 
with skepticism or bigotry.This is the source of all the 
religious wars. "My view of religion is right; therefore, 
yours  must be  wrong." Pridefulness  leads  one  into  a 
polarized position of "me right, you wrong."The anxi­
ety  that  accompanies  this  puts  the  person  on  the 
defensive because he lives in a world of win-lose. 

As  we  move  up  to  Courage  at  level  200, there  is 
appropriateness for the first  time. The  person is  able 
to face,  cope, and handle, and they become  empow­
ered because they have begun to tell the truth about 

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

293 

themselves. The  person  from  the  level  of  Courage 
walks  down  the same  street and sees  a  challenging, 
exciting world of opportunity. It is a thrilling world of 
growing,  learning,  expanding,  and  watching  others 
grow. There is  an inner joy that comes from  expand­
ing one's own space. Courage settled the United Sates 
of America and the West. It created all  the  industrial 
empires  and  scientific  enterprises.  It  got  us  to  the 
moon. It is the world of growth and expansion. 

What kind of God is  the God of that level of con­
sciousness? The person on that level of consciousness 
has an open mind for the fIrst time. He does not pride­
fully  presume  that  he  has  the  answer.  He  is  not 
aligned with vengeful negativity. He  says for  the fIrst 
time, "I  wonder if there  is  such a  being. I  wonder if 
there is something greater than the personal self. I am 
open to learning  about this." He  then treats  the  God 
question the same as  he  does  the world question, as 
an exciting opportunity for exploration, and discovers 
that spiritual research is  eXciting, and the things that 
are discovered are intriguing and benefIcial. 

The next energy fIeld, Neutral at level 250, results 
in being unattached.This person says it is okay if they 
get  the  job  and  okay  if they  do  not. They  are  unat­
tached and not run by the world. Their power greatly 
. increases  because  they  are  no  longer  a  victim. The 
world  does  not  control  them  anymore. They  say,  "If 
this  person stays in my life, great; if they don't, I will 
fInd somebody else to be with."They no longer live in 
fear,  they have  moved  up  to  a  certain okayness, and 
. their view of the world  is  now okay. The  God  of an 
okay world would be a God of freedom to expand and 

294 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

explore. "If there  is  a  God, it's  okay with  me,  and  if 
there isn't, that's okay with me."There is an inner fair­
ness about God. "If there is a  God, He will be fair, and 
I  will  learn  about  it  when  the  time  comes; if there 
isn't, that is okay with me, too." 

At the level ofWillingness at calibration level 310, 
the person now declares an intention and says "yes" to 
life. "I  join; I  align  myself;  I  agree  with  things." The 
person  begins  to  experience  a  willingness  to  be  of 
service, along with a certain happiness, and views the 
world  as  friendly. When  one  is  willing,  the  world  is 
friendly.  Now the person walks  down the  street and 
sees potentially friendly  people. All  one  has  to  do  is 
walk up  to  an old lady and  say, "Hi, what a  beautiful 
day." She says, "Hey, nobody has talked to me all morn­
ing. Isn't this nice?"The world is a friendly place, and 
God perhaps becomes a promising and hopeful con­
cept. The  God  of a  friendly  world  would  become  a 
friendly God. Even if one does not believe in Him, one 
begins to  trust Him. If one does not have  a  belief in 
God, at least the friendly person says, "Well, if there is 
one, he will be at least as kindly as  my grandmother. 
He  is  going  to  understand  human  nature  and  is  not 
going to throw me into the pit fires  of hell for being 
human. He created me as  human; I'm his handiwork. 
What is He going to do? Condemn His own creation?" 
Therefore, there is  a certain trust in a God. 

As  we move up to Acceptance at calibration level 
350, we have begun to own ourself as a source of our 
own  power. We  are  the  creator of the  happiness  in 
our  own  life  now,  and  that  transformation  in  con­
sciousness  brings  a  feeling  of  adequacy  and  confi­

WORRY,  FEAR,  AND  ANXIETY 

295 

dence;  the  view  of  the  world  now  is  harmonious. 
When  we  walk  down  the  street, we  see  the  subtle, 
beautiful  naturalness  of  how  everything  interacts, 
how everything is  really where it should be, and that 
everybody wants to be what they are. The bag lady is 
there because she wants to be a bag lady; nobody has 
forced her to be that. She has chosen to be that which 
she is. We stop blaming things, and we begin to expe­
rience  that  the  world  is  expressing  harmony  to  the 
degree  to  which  we  are  willing  to  own  the  truth 
about ourself and express it. The whole movie is har­
monious, and God now begins to look like a merciful 
and forgiving  God of a harmonious world. 

With  the  quieting  of emotionality  that  is  conse­
quent to acceptance, the way is now clear to facilitate 
the  use  of  reason,  discernment,  and  the  intellect 
without  interference  from  stressful  feelings,  such  as 
fear of survival, anger, and the rest. Free of the distor­
tions and distractions, the mind becomes clear enough 
to utilize logic and the benefits of education and higher 
learning,  including  academic  study  and  abstract 
thought, which is  the  level of mind that includes  the 
calibration range  of the  400s. This  is  also  the realm 
of science, which  is  based  on  the  Newtonian  para­
digm  of proof, evidence, and  the  laws  of cause  and 
effect.  The  400s  include  the  Great  Books  of  the 
Western World, as well as celebrated geniuses, such as 
Newton, Einstein, and Freud. 

In the 400s, personal power increases markedly by 
maximal use of the prefrontal cortex of the brain with 
which fear,  worry, and  anxiety  can  be  handled  with 
the tools of logic and reason rather than just raw emo­

296 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

tion.The world therefore looks less fearful because its 
risks  are  comprehended from  a  higher, more  mature 
level  rather  than  from  the  raw  emotionality  of  the 
child. The  mind thus  discovers  safeguards and limits 
in  order  to  arrive  at  a  balance  and  the  capacity for 
rational judgment and reality testing. 

Via good will and a rational worldview, inner anxiety 
diminishes,  and  the  shift  in  brain  physiology,  plus 
intention, allows for the emergence of Love as a dom­
inant life  principle at consciousness calibration level 
500.At this level, the nurturance of relationships and 
the  welfare  of others  become  predominant  in  con­
trast to lower levels of consciousness that are the con­
sequence  of  domination  by  the  narcissistic  core  of 
the ego. 

With further evolution, the level of Love becomes 

unconditional  at  540, and  the  way is  paved for  con­
sciousness to evolve to the higher spiritual levels that 
calibrate  at approximately 600, which  is  the  level  of 
spiritual Bliss and Peace. 

this  world,  our 

lovingness  emerges 

As we move up in our willingness to be of service 
as 
to 
Unconditional  Love  to  nurture  and  support  life. We 
are  willing  to  forgive,  and  beginning  revelation 
occurs. Due to the release of endorphins, we begin to 
see  the  lovingness  that  is  everywhere. We  see  it  in 
nature and in the animal world.We see the naturallov­
ingness  of  the  child  within  everybody. The  loving 
heart of the child is still alive in everyone. If a person 
does  not  experience  that,  it  is  beCause  they  do  not 
know  how to  tune  in  to  it,  but the  innocent, loving 
heart of the  child is  in everyone. It can be appealed 

W 0  R R Y,  FE A R,  AND  A N X lET Y 

297 

to, and that is why the merciless killer in the presence 
of a loving person can become harmless. In contrast, 
in  the  presence  of  a  fearful  person,  it  creates  the 
space for him to attack, and he does attack.The loving 
person then experiences a safe world, and God must, 
of necessity, be at least at the same level of conscious­
ness as he is and therefore be unconditionally loving. 
The  experience  of the  truth  of  this  brings  the 
person  into  a  joyfulness. Joyfulness  brings  about  a 
transfiguration  in  consciousness.  It brings  one  into 
compassion. The inner serenity of the compassionate 
person begins  to  see  the  perfection of creation. The 
unconditional love  of the  Creator creates a  oneness. 
The  person begins  to  experience  the  oneness of all 
beings. Therefore, all  of life  in  all  its  expressions  is 
sacred. There is  a beginning awareness of the sacred­
ness  of  life  and  a  merging  into  an  illumined  and 
enlightened state of blissfulness and infmite peace in 
which the total oneness of Creation brings an aware­
ness of God as the essence of beingness itself. 

As  I stood on top of the mountain in the presence 
of  the  rattlesnake,  what  was  it  that  entranced  and 
flXed both of us into a state of infmite peace and one­
ness?  I  could not really say  in  that state  of aliveness 
that the life of the snake and my life were two differ­
ent lives because it seemed as though they were one. 
The  two were being  controlled by the  nature  of the 
One-that which brought what seemed to be the two 
of  us  together  as  one  experience. There  was  really 
only  one  experience  occurring.  One  might  say  that 
the  one  experience was  being  experienced through 
the two, or, the two were experiencing their oneness. 

298 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Therefore,  no  thought  of  attack  arose  because  the 
energy field  of that  experience  had  already  arisen. 
The feeling of infmite peace is often called the Peace 
of God. 

There are certain teachings that say there are really 

only two emotions-love and fear-and all the nega­
tive feelings below Love are nothing but variations of 
fear. We  can see all  of these expressions of fear-fear 
of moral wrong, fear  of the  inability to  survive  and 
exist, fear  over the loss  of the  source  of one's hap­
piness,  and  anger  over  the  intrinsic  fear  that 'not 
getting'  brings  to· a  person. Therdore, we  could  say 
that these are forms of fear. 

There are really only two expression of emotion­
love, which starts  at  500  and  becomes  infinite  in  its 
expression,  and  fear,  which  begins  at  100  and  goes 
ever  downward  in  its  expression.  Therefore,  the 
handling of all the negative feelings arises out of the 
willingness to accept that we have the power within 
us  to  handle  this  inner fearfulness, to  recognize  that 
we are the source of it, and to stop projecting it onto 
the  world  or  God.  No  one  created  a  fearful  world; 
there is no such thing. The fearful world is within us. 
We carry it with us and thus we can let it go. We  can 
let  the  fear  of the  fear  go,  as  well  as  fear  itself,  and 
move into the presence of Love. 

CHAPTER  10 

Pain and Suffering 

This chapter will cover the subject of the alleviation of 
pain and suffering. The world thinks that they are  the 
same thing, but we will show how suffering and pain 
are actually different from each other. We  will look at 
the relationship between the physical, mental, and spir­
itual aspects of the experience of the body. 

It  is  said  that  all  diseases,  illnesses,  and  human 
problems are physical, mental, and spiritual, but what 
does  that really  mean? As  a  physician for  more  than 
fIfty years, I have learned about the physical aspects; 
as  a  psychiatrist,  I  have  learned  about  the  mental 
components;  and  in  consciousness  and  spiritual 
research  and  experience,  I  have  learned  about  the 
spiritual dimension. 

What is meant by spirit? Is it a fantasy, or is it some­
thing real that we can work with? Is it something that 
is only useful for religious people? What do we need to 
know about 'spirit' in order to experience the truth of 
it for ourselves, and how can we utilize this knowledge 
for the alleviation of our personal problems and those 
of the people we love? 

We  will  learn  how  to  handle  acute  and  chronic 
pain, and even more importantly, how to be with that 
pain. There  are  two  problems  to  address: The  frrst  is 
how to handle the symptoms specifIcally and discover 
what part hypnosis, acupuncture, and other modalities 
play in the alleviation of pain. The second is to look at 
the levels of consciousness and how they relate to the 
experience. of pain. Again, we will be referring  to the 
Map  of Consciousness, which  shows  the  calibrated 

299 

300 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

levels of energy, their relative power and direction, the 
emotional component of each level, the process going 
on in consciousness at each level and how that influ­
ences our view of the world and of God, and how the 
problem is resolved if we do not have a belief in a God. 
There will be clinical examples of problems I have 
personally  experienced  and  worked  through  using 
these  techniques,  along  with  examples  that  have 
worked for others. With these clinical experiences, we 
can  demonstrate  certain  principles  of consciousness 
that offer a  benefit for  our lives  as  a  whole. What we 
learn in studying one specific example then has other 
applications, so we will be turning lemons into lemon­
ade.We will learn how to transform something that the 
world considers to be awful, such as pain, and how to 
derive  benefit from  it  and have  our life  prosper as  a 
result  of the knowledge gained from  the one specific 
experience. In order to do this, we need to know some­
thing about the nature of consciousness itself and how 
that will help us in our lives in general. 

What is  the nature of human experience? Where is 

experience experienced? We will again look at the rela­
tionship  between  body,  mind,  and  spirit.  Everybody 
uses that phrase, "body, mind, and spirit," but what does 
it mean in a practical way?  I became a scientist with a 
skeptical,  pragmatic  mind.  I  am  very  impressed  by 
what works and am very unimpressed by the hypothet­
ical  and the  theoretical. I  am very interested in what 
brings  about  results  and  what  one  can  replicate 
through one's personal experience. 

As  said  previously, the  first  thing  to  realize  is  that 
the body has no capacity to experience itself. This is  a 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

301 

surprising thought because we tWnk we are experienc­
ing our body-we all tWnk we are our body. How does 
the body get experienced? For example, the arm has no 
way of experiencing its  armness; the leg cannot expe­
rience  its  being  a  leg. These  parts  are  experienced 
through  sensations,  as  is  the  whole  body. We  do  not 
experience the body but experience the sensations of 
the  body. And where are  these sensations  of the body 
experienced?  They  are  experienced  in  the  mind. 
Without a  mind, we cannot experience what is  going 
on in the  body, and we  cannot experience  the  sensa­
tions that tell us about the body.The experience of the 
body is not occurring in the body; it is occurring in the 
mind.That is the flfSt surprising thought to get used to. 

The next surprising thought is  that the mind can­
not experience itself.A thought cannot experience its 
thoughtness;  a  feeling  cannot  experience  its  feeling­
ness; and a memory cannot experience its own memo­
ryness. The mind has to be in something greater than 
itself in order to know what is  going on in mind. And 
what  is  that?  One  knows  what  is  going  on  in  mind 
because of consciousness itself. 

The  content  of  mind,  and  what  is  going  on  in 
mind, is  known through consciousness; therefore, all 
experience  is  occurring  in  consciousness.  One's 
awareness  of what is  happening is  occurring within 
one's  consciousness.  For  example,  if a  part  of  the 
brain  is  cut, then that part  of the  mind  is  no  longer 
operative in the physical domain. If the area cut out is 
the sensory region, then the opposite side of the body 
is no longer experienced.Therefore, the body is  expe­
rienced by the mind via the brain. 

302 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

We know that if consciousness is eliminated, there 
is no awareness of what is going on in the mind. That 
is  the purpose of anesthesia. Interestingly, conscious­
ness  itself  is  experienced  from  an  even  greater 
domain.As this progresses, one realizes that the lesser 
is  always experienced from that which is  the greater. 
The greater encompasses  and allows  the  experience 
of the  lesser.  Consciousness  is  then  experienced  in 
the  greatest  domain, which  is  the  one  without  limit 
that includes awareness. It is  the nature of awareness 
being  itself to  know what  is  going  on in  conscious­
ness. It is  the nature of consciousness to know what 
is going on in mind. It is  the nature of mind to know 
what is  going on with sensations, and it is  the nature 
of sensations to know what is going on with the body. 
It is important to know that all ordinary experience 

is  going on in consciousness alone. Where is  that con­
sciousness when we experience something? Where do 
we experience it? Is there a place where consciousness 
is located? Does it have a specific space or location? 

It is important to know that consciousness has no 
particular space, no physical  area, and no limitation. 
The  common  fantasy  is  "I  experience  things  in  my 
head." Actually,  we  do  not  experience  them  in  the 
head. Where do we experience a thought? We experi­
ence a thought nowhere; there is no specific location 
or  space  in  which  we  experience  a  thought. The 
nature  of consciousness  is  that  it  has  no  particular 
form; it is without form. Its  content is  with form, but 
the field  of consciousness  itself is  like  space, having 
no  particular  locality.  This  will  be  important  later 
when we discuss  one of the techniques for handling 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

303 

pain, which can be handled both locally and generally. 

There are several ways to handle pain and the spe­
cific  sensation and experience of it. Where we are  as 
a  being  with  the  experience  of pain,  and  how  we 
evolve  in  our  own  consciousness,  will  determine 
whether the pain involves suffering or not.The pain is 
one thing, and the suffering is another. 

The  first  thing  to  eliminate  is  the  belief system 
that  pain  equals  suffering  because  that  sets  up  a 
whole  series  of programs  that  need  to  be  undone. 
Pain  is  one thing, and it is  quite  possible to  be with 
pain yet  be  totally indifferent  to  it.  It is  possible  for 
pain to exist in the body and yet have relatively little 
or no experience of the pain or suffering with it at all 
because  of  an  analgesic  or  altered  (e.g.,  hypnotic) 
state of mind. It is  as though the pain is  still present, 
but  one  is  not  connected  with  the  pain. The  pain 
exists on its own but without the person being at the 
effect of it. In  other words, it is  not necessary to  be 
the  victim of the  pain. One  can  be  with  the pain in 
such a way that does not involve suffering or any kind 
of agony.To realize that this is possible is the first step 
that leads one out of it. It is the letting go of the belief 
that pain and suffering are the same thing. 

An example is the belief that going to the dentist is 
necessarily painful.At one time in my life, many years 
ago,  going  to  the  dentist  was  agonizing.  I  remember 
that I always put off going because my pain threshold 
was so low. I literally had to  have  analgesia to get my 
teeth cleaned; I was pain prone. 

What is it that sets our pain threshold or our readi­
ness to experience pain? As the years went by, I learned 

304 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

various  spiritual  and  consciousness  techniques  and 
began to  apply them to pain. The  experience  of pain 
began to diminish, and much to my surprise, I could go 
to  the  dentist  and  experience  only  moderate  pain 
instead of agony. Gradually the pain became mild and 
then  only just  a  discomfort. When I  go  to the  dentist 
now,  I  don't  even  notice  any  discomfort. It  seems  as 
though I am in the chair for only a minute, and then I 
am  out  and  say,  "Are  you  done  already?  I  can  hardly 
believe you are done already!" 

At  the  end  of this  chapter we  will  discuss  some 
self-hypnosis  techniques,  a  kind  of  autosuggestion, 
that will reinforce what we have learned, such as how 
to  utilize  a  somewhat altered  state  of consciousness 
on our behalf, how to come from a suggestible space 
to learn more quickly, how to relieve pain, and how it 
is  a  medium for quickly educating ourself. When you 
next go to the dentist, you may not have much time to 
learn  these  techniques,  so  we  share  some  ways  to 
speed them up. 

The first  thing to  address is  the handling  of acute 
pain. A person is walking along and suddenly sprains 
an  ankle,  resulting  in  agonizing  pain;  or  they  break 
their leg or suddenly have  a  gallbladder attack, renal 
colic, or a coronary; or they just have an ordinary acci­
dent, such  as  barking the shin, or hitting the head on 
something, and there is that stunning moment of pain. 
How  does  one  handle  that  acute  situation?  We  will 
reveal a technique to use in dealing with a variety of ill­
nesses as well as in healing both acute and chronic pain. 
There is a shock when we suddenly ftnd ourselffac­
ing an accident, such as scalding ourself by pouring hot 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

305

water on our hand, or burning ourself on the stove.The 
technique that we will get a lot of mileage from is  the 
whole concept of letting go  of resistance. We  want to 
look at the  benefit of letting go  and  compare  it with 
what the mind usually does. The mind normally resists 
an  experience  out of the  expectation  of suffering.  It 
already has a  program  set up: "Pain  means  suffering, 
and  I'm  going  to  resist  it." The  fantasy  is  that  if we 
resist it, we will eliminate it. 

The first  thing we have to  know is  that the relief 
of  pain  and  suffering  comes  rapidly  by  going  180 
degrees  in  the  opposite  direction-by  capitulating 
and  letting  go  of resisting  the  pain.  How  does  this 
work in everyday life? We  will provide some clinical· 
examples  of rapid healing resulting from  techniques 
that  are  completely  different  from  those  ordinarily 
used by the mind in an average situation. 

To let go of resistance means to completely be with 
the  event  and  totally  surrender  to  the  sensation.  It 
means to ignore  the thoughts  that we may be having 
about it. Instead of thinking about it, we go right into 
the direct experience of the sensation and totally let go 
of resisting  it. For example, if we get burned by acci­
dent and let go of resisting the sensation, at first it will 
be  like  an  overwhelm. We  open  the  doors,  the  pain 
rushes in, and we totally surrender to it and let go  of 
resisting  it. The way to  do  this  is  to  say, "More, more, 
more' The  way  to  hold  this  in  mind  so  that  this  is 
acceptable is  to know that there is  only so much pain 
in any experience.We open the door to it and let it run 
out rapidly. "I let go of resisting this experience. I let go 
of resisting being with it. I ignore the thoughts because 

306 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the thoughts are not going to be useful. Instead I total­
ly surrender and allow myself to experience it totally." 
It is as if the doors open, there is a rush, and the pain is 
totally experienced out rapidly in a very few minutes. 
I  remember twisting my ankle  in San  Francisco. It 
was a severe twist that ordinarily would have required 
seeing  an  orthopedist,  getting  the  ankle  taped,  or 
maybe  even having a  cast put on for  six weeks or so. 
Instead,  I  sat  down  on  a  park  bench, just  closed  my 
eyes, and surrendered to it. It came in waves of excru­
ciating pain. If I had resisted it, I would have ended up 
in a cast. In other words, if one resists the pain, it 'turns 
an acute pain into a chronic condition. I just sat down 
on the park bench and let it swamp over me. I surren­
dered to it and waves of pain came over me. Yet, curi­
ously enough, it was devoid of suffering because I was 
choosing to experience the experience. In doing that, 
I was the master of the experience and no longer the 
victim. I was the one saying, "I choose to experience it; 
give  me more of it." As  a  result of that, the amount of 
suffering involved was really minimal.The alleviation of 
pain was very rapid, and within three to four minutes, 
I was up and walking again. The pain had decreased to 
a very minimal level, and as I continued walking, I kept 
letting go of resisting the pain. 

At a later date when I broke my left foot, I did the 
same thing.When I was chopping wood, a huge oak log 
fell on my left foot and crushed all the bones across the 
top  of it. A  short  time  later,  at  Christmas, I  was  back 
dancing in the ballroom. My foot was never in a cast; I 
did nothing about it except consciously choose to let 
go of resisting the experience.After that, I had an injury 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

307 

that  resulted  in  an  amputation. Again,  there  was  the 
same shock of the experience and then the knowing of 
how to handle  it by letting go of resisting the experi­
ence, constantly letting go  of resisting  the  sensations. 
As  I  did  that, what  the  world  would  call  miraculous 
happened  right  before  my  eyes. The  ftrst  thing  I  did 
after inadvertently cutting my thumb off with a  circu­
lar saw was to instantly stop resisting the experience. I 
just stood still and allowed the experience to sweep in 
over me, and as I did that, within seconds the bleeding 
stopped. I have the piece of board that I was cutting, 
and there are just eight drops of blood on it. By letting 
go  of resisting  the  experience, the  digital  artery  that 
had been severed should have pulsated in a grotesque 
manner, but no such thing happened. 

A  friend  who  severely  burned  himself  in  the 
kitchen  just  stood  still  and  consciously  chose  not  to 
resist that burn; the pain of the burn was gone in a mat­
ter of a minute or two. Later, there was no blister at all. 
Ordinarily,  it  would  have  become  a  big  water  blister 
and taken months to heal, but the only thing that hap­
pened was a discoloration. 

One  time,  a  cabinetmaker  in  one  of  my  classes 

burned both of his hands. He followed the same tech­
nique,  instantly  letting  go  of the  resisting.  His  hands 
would  normally  have  been  covered with blisters  and 
been in bandages for weeks; instead, he said that in a 
matter of three or four minutes, the pain was gone and 
there never was any blister formation. These are just a 
few  examples  of  instant  healing  which  demonstrate 
that the body knows how to heal itself the minute we 
let go of resistance. 

308 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Why should this be so? There is no magic involved; 
anybody can experience the truth ofthis.This has been 
a common teaching for thousands of years. Those who 
have  tried  Zen  meditation  know  that  the  first  thing 
taught  is  the  handling  of discomfort  of the  physical 
body by letting go of resisting the experience, cancel­
ing  out thoughts  about it, and  becoming  one with  it, 
thereby disappearing it.  . 

In consciousness work, the  process is  called'dis­
appearing'.  By  totally  letting  go  of  resisting  some­
thing, we disappear it out of our experience. One can 
see that the experience is prolonged by resistance.As 
long as we resist a  thing and  hold it, it continues  its 
existence. Resistance  gives  it the power over us, and 
we  then  become  the  victim  of  that. We  are  at  the 
effect of that which we resist. The minute we let go of 
our resistance and become one with it, it disappears. 
This also means letting go of all associated images and 
their accumulated energy. 

The reasons for this can be understood from refer­
ring  to  the  Map  of Consciousness. As  stated  earlier, 
each of the levels of consciousness has been calibrat­
ed mathematically  to  show its  power relative  to  the 
other levels. The arrows indicate whether the energy 
is  in a  negative  or a  positive direction, which is very 
important in determining the way that we experience 
things. Those things in a  negative direction are expe­
rienced as pain and suffering and are detrimental and 
destructive to our lives. 

The various  energy fields  influence  our emotions 

and are indicators of a process going on in conscious­
ness. They influence  how we  see  and experience the 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

309 

work as well as how we experience our relationship to 
something that is greater than the personal self, which 
the world calls a Deity. It is  a  relationship to a  greater 
field  of  consciousness  and  the  powerful  fields  that 
come about at the higher levels. 

The  only  reason  to  review  this  is  to  understand 
what happens in the technique of handling acute pain. 
Resistance  to  pain is  a  negative  energy field  that cali­
brates at about 150. If one tries to control the pain or 
use will power against it and resist it, a negative energy 
field that calibrates at about 150 occurs within the self. 
This would be about the same level as the emotions of 
resentment or grief where we resent the pain and are 
angry  about it. If we  move  up  to  letting  go  of resist­
ance, if we have the courage to use the technique and 
are unreservedly willing to try it, then we move up to 
the  field  of  250  called  Neutral.  Moving  into  Neutral 
means being in a positive, detached energy field where 
"It's okay with me, and I'm willing to experience this 
thing out." Willingness moves us up to  an energy field 
of 310 where  we  say yes  to  life  and  its  experiences, 
where  we  agree  and  align  with  it,  and  where  life 
expresses itself as  a positive intention. 

Instead of resisting life, we go with life and surren­
der  it  to  God. This  is  the  wisdom  of the Tao,  which 
teaches that the willow tree bends with the wind, but 
the oak tree, which resists it, breaks. Instead of resisting 
what  has  occurred  when  barking  our  shin,  we  just 
become like the willow tree and go with it; we let go 
of  resisting  it.  We  allow  that  experience  to  flow 
through the self. By doing that, we move out of a nega­
tive, painful energy field  full of resentment, anger, and 

310 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

fear.  Fear is  at  the negative  level of 100, a  low energy 
field and far away from joy.The higher the number, the 
greater the feeling  of happiness. We  can then actually 
choose, be willing, and even  accept  that  it  is  what  is 
necessary to handle  this, which moves us  all  the way 
up to 380, a very high energy field. 

When we choose to go with life, whether it is  run­
ning  across  a  rattlesnake  or  some  other  challenging 
event, and surrender to that experience, we invite and 
bring  forth  from  within  ourselves  a  greater  power, a 
higher  energy. Those  people  who  have  utilized  this 
technique end up calling it a higher power, and we will 
hear them say, "I  called upon my Higher Power."Those 
who have not heard that expression may say, "It is  not 
real to us, so how can we make the experiences real?" 
We  can make them real by doing them. It is actually 
through the doingness  of it that these  things  become 
real.  By  doing this  exercise, we  then begin. to  experi­
ence  that  something  other  than  the  personal  self is 
handling  the  experience,  and  within  moments, what 
was agonizing is now very bearable. We  are  out of the 
resistance and fear of the suffering.We want to avoid or 
bypass  the  negative  energy  field  of  a  lower  energy 
power and instead move up to a higher one, because, 
as we move up to higher energies such as love, we are 
then in the energy field of 500. 

When  we  move  into  unconditional  lovingness  at 
level  540, the  field  has  the  capacity  to  heal;  it  is  the 
level of healers.The field that healers generate calibrates 
at 540 and up. It is  an immensely loving field, and the 
emotion  is  experienced  as  lovingness-that desire  to 
be with life, to say yes to it, and to let go of resistance. 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

3II 

The healing from  acute pain that results  automati­
cally from using this technique can be experienced by 
anyone. I have used it over and over again as have the 
people who  have  tried it.  Many  people  have  had  the 
opportunity. I remember describing the technique to a 
Sunday night class, and during the week, several mem­
bers had acute injuries where this information was life­
saving for  them. It literally enabled  them to  carry on 
through the terrible experiences. Not long after, a big, 
burly friend visited me and gave me a hug, which broke 
three  ribs.  I  felt  them  snap  but did  not  say  anything 
about  it  because  he  would  have  felt  guilty. The  ribs 
healed, but later that winter, another friend  gave  me a 
hug and broke three ribs on the other side of the body. 
Needless to say, I did not mention that either (so much 
.for my 'rib karma'). 

How  can  this  technique  be  utilized  in  handling 
chronic  pain, which  is  different  from  acute  pain? We 
handle it in the same way as used for acute pain; how­
ever, it is  done in a somewhat different manner. As  we 
said  before,  all  experiences  are  being experienced in 
consciousness. We  look to see where the pain is  being 
experienced,  such  as  in  the  thumb  that  got  cut  off. 
First, we could say the  pain is  in  the thumb. Actually, 
where  is  the  pain  being  experienced?  It  moves  our 
attention away from the thumb. If one says, "I move the 
focus of attention to the top of my head," then, from the 
locus of the top of the head, we look at the area of the 
thumb and experience the painfulness of it, but where 
is  the  painfulness  of the  thumb  occurring? When we 
do that, we begin to notice that the painfulness is being 
experienced everywhere-all around the body and the 

312 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

energy fields of the body-it is really sort of occurring 
everywhere. 

Most  everyone  has  experienced  the  pain  that 
makes  one  sick  to  their  stomach  and  feel  flip-floppy 
and weak in the knees.We experience it everywhere. If 
we go into the top of the head, just as an exercise that 
we  do,  from  that  point  we  begin  to  experience  the 
pain.We notice the pain as being everywhere and then 
use the same technique that was used in handling the 
acute pain. We  let go of resisting what is being experi­
enced  everywhere; it  is  not  going  on in  any  specific 
place. 

It is desirous to clearly differentiate the feeling, sen­
sation, or experience from the thoughts. We  are going 
to  be  going  on  with  all  of life's  problems, especially 
with physical illnesses, with an absolute sensation com­
ing  in  of what  is  really  being  experienced. The  mind 
then  elaborates  about  the  experience,  labels  it,  and 
puts concepts  on it. For  instance, one  cannot  experi­
ence an ulcer or a sprain.Those are labels, concepts, or 
diagnoses. 'Pain' is a concept as is the word 'sensation'. 
The  experiential phenomenon is beyond words, con­
cepts, or labels. 

What 

is 

a  person  actually  experiencing? 

Experiencing what the world calls an 'ulcer' is a sensa­
tion in the abdominal area, 'right here'. Then the mind 
says, "Well, if I can't call it an ulcer, I'm going to say it is 
burning."That again is a concept.We have learned what 
that  means  and  that  it is  a  thought form. We  are  not 
actually experiencing a burning; instead, we are going 
inside to an experiencing of the experience, which has 
no words.We go beyond the words to the experiencing 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

313 

of the experience. 

When  the  animal  experiences  it,  it  has  no  words 
about it; it is  just what is going on. Why do we not call 
up  our animal  nature  and  just be with what is  being 
experienced  without  saying  anything  about  it?  It  is 
because  all  these  thoughts  bring  in complicated pro­
grams and belief systems, and we then become subject 
to the effect of these thoughts. If I say to myself,"1 have 
an ulcer," then a group of programs arises that go with 
'ulcer'. Because of the nature of the mind, we begin to 
experience  all  the programs because of the power of 
the  mind. The  most  difficult  concept  for  people  to 
grasp  when  they  enter  research  work  in  the  field  of 
consciousness itself is  the realization of the power of 
the mind and how influential it really is.We just cannot 
be careless about our thoughts. 

Once  we  understand  the  power of the  mind  and 
the nature of thought, we begin to realize that one of 
the principles of consciousness is  that we are  subject 
only to what we hold in mind.This one sentence is the 
key to the healing of all illnesses, pain, and suffering. We 
are subject only to  what we hold in mind. The mind 
is  extraordinarily  powerful. The  great .difficulty  that 
people  have  is  in  comprehending  how  powerful  the 
mind is. Therefore, in dealing with pain or suffering of 
any kind, it is  first necessary to discontinue, let go, and 
cancel all  our belief systems  about that. Research  has 
shown that it is  the belief system itself which literally 
creates the experience.The incident is an expression of 
that belief system. It is  as  if the mind justifies what it 
believes to be true. 

We can know if this is true by beginning to cancel 

314 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the belief that pain and suffering are the same thing. In 
handling pain, either acute or chronic, we have to can­
cel  all  thoughts  since  they  are  really  belief  systems. 
Instead, we have  to go for  radical truth, radical in that 
we release everything except the wordless experienc­
ing of what is literally being experienced and let go of 
the  resistance to  it. When we  do  that, we will experi­
ence  relief from  the  suffering,  and  curiously enough, 
we will reach a  point ~here  we do not care whether 
the 'pain' is present or not. 

That may be a difficult thing to accept in the begin­
ning because the mind wants to be rid of the pain.This 
therapeutic approach is  to accept it instead, to let the 
sensations  be  present  but  move  away  from  them.  In 
other words, it  is  like  the  pain  is  circumscribed, and 
now we begin to disengage from that localized pain. It 
is the same as when we experience morphine with the 
pain of a broken ankle.The pain is present, and then we 
begin to feel ourselves move away from that pain. It is 
no longer us or ours. In that example, the narcotic does 
what we are explaining can be done by consciousness. 
The narcotic does not actually do it, but it enables our 
consciousness  to  make  this  very  move.  However, we 
can learn to make  this very move without being trig­
gered by a narcotic. 

In  the  past,  I  have  had  to  do  that.  I  have  been 
severely  allergic  to  any  kind  of analgesic, narcotic, or 
anesthetic for many years, and over those years, I have 
had all kinds of severe illnesses and accidents, plus sur­
gery  without  anesthesia.  Out  of necessity,  instead  of 
resorting  to  those  usual  methods  of treating  pain,  I 
have had to investigate  and discover the capacity and 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

315 

power of consciousness itself. I found that all the anal­
gesics did was allow consciousness to exercise its own 
power. Therefore, we can own that we have the power 
within  our  own  consciousness  to  achieve  the  same 
results without the analgesic. 

We begin to move away from the pain by letting go 
of resisting it and not wanting to change it. We just let 
the  sensations  be  present  and  then  shift  our way  of 
being with them to the pOint where we do not care if 
they exist. It may sound amazing that we do not even 
care if they are present. It is very simple.We have been 
upset over many things in our lives. We  have felt  that 
we have to do something about them, but suddenly at 
one point, we let them go and are indifferent to them. 
For example, there might have been a problem in the 
back yard  that  ~as  driving  us  crazy,  and  one  day we 
said, "Oh, the heck with it." Suddenly, we moved' from 
trying to do something about it, to control it, to change 
it, and exert our will, to just letting it be there. (When 
we try to change people, places, or circumstances, we 
see that we are up against the impossible, and the only 
thing we create is  suffering). The minute we just let it 
be, our experience  of it disappears. We  move  up  to  a 
state of painlessness in the presence of pain. 

The  sensations  coming  from  a  painful  injury  are 
going on, and who cares about it? The sensations from 
the amputation are going on, but I do not care about it. 
It makes no difference. If they are there, they are there, 
and if they are  not there, they are  not. That all  comes 
about through  the very simple  practice  in  which we 
are  totally indifferent. Most  of the  pain I  have  experi­
enced  in  my  own  life  eventually  disappeared  of  its 

316 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

own. It may take minutes in the case of an acute injury, 
or it may take months for chronic pain. Other people 
have  reported  the  same  experiences  from  using  this 
technique. 

I had one illness that took well over a year of con­
stantly  letting  go, constantly  releasing, and  constantly 
surrendering  before  it finally  disappeared, so  I  know 
that the sensations will eventually disappear, but I  am 
not  doing  these  things  to  try  to  achieve  that. That 
would be trying to change it and get rid of it. I do know 
as a matter of clinical observation that as a person lets 
go  of resisting  the  pain,  there  comes  a  point  where 
they don't care if it is there or not, and then suddenly 
one morning they wake up and it is gone. We don't let 
go of resisting it in order to get rid of the pain-that is 
a  happy side  effect. When we  reach  the  point where 
we do not care whether the pain is present or not, then 
what difference does it make, because at that point, we 
are immune to the pain. 

It  is  very  good  to  know  that  our  mind  has  this 
power and capacity, and that all we need is someone to 
point it out to us and encourage us to try it so we can 
see that it works.There is no need to be in a state of suf­
fering over pain of any kind. Pain is one thing; suffering 
is another. We  have to say that over and over to ourself 
and  begin  to  utilize  these  techniques. Then  we  will 
experience  there  is  a  'me'  that  is  separate  from  the 
pain. It is like we are  not connected with it anymore, 
and we  are  something even greater than  and  beyond 
that which is painful. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  life's  experiences?  The 
meaning  determines  how we  experience  them,  how 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

317 

we feel about them. Isn't that so? It does not make any 
difference  at  all what happens in the world if we can 
be with it in a certain way. It is not what is  happening 
out there but how we are with it. People who are quite 
evolved  can  be with  situations  that look  dramatically 
tragic and yet be unaffected by them. 

One of the things we can do about pain is  to con­
sciously progress in the movement and growth of our 
own consciousness. Pain proneness comes about as  a 
result of holding a lot of negative thoughts and feelings 
within ourselves. Spiritual work and evolution have an 
overall value.The whole process of forgiveness was not 
really  heard  about  much  except  within  religion,  and 
now it has become almost a social phenomenon.When 
we. go about our social life  now and somebody brings 
up  a  resentment, the  other people  will  look  at  the 
person because they know the next step for them is to 
learn  how to  forgive  it, or they will  be  at  the  painful 
effect of it. 

All  pain  and  suffering  come  about  as  a  result  of 
what we  are  already  holding  in  mind. Why  are  some 
people  so  susceptible  to  pain  and  suffering,  and  for 
others, it is very transitory? The pain and the suffering 
go through the surface of them but not into their core. 
They can get extremely upset over something, but who 
they  really  are  within  remains  unruffled.  Somehow 
there is a  differentiation  between who one is and the 
experience.The true Self is totally unruffled and allows 
the  experience  to  flow  through  the  self. The  upset, 
such as  emotional conflict or whatever it happens to 
be, may last for hours, but the true inner Self does not 
even  participate  in  the  upset. That  is  the  differential 

318 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

between what is one's real self and what is being expe­
rienced. It is  the letting go  of the habit of identifying 
that  one  is  the  experience. One  is  that  in which the 
experiencing is  happening, but one is  not the  experi­
ence itself. 

How can we bring about this evolution and growth 
in  ourselves?  That  takes  us  back  to  the  Map  of 
Consciousness to fmd how we re  te to chronic pain in 
order to transcend it  and no  10  ger be  in a  state  of 
suffermg about it. 

Near the bottom of the chart is the energy field of 
Guilt  at calibration level 130. Pro onged and excessive 
guilt, for example, makes us pron  to sickness, accident 
injury, pain, and suffering. The vi  w  of the world that 
comes out of this guiltiness resuI s in a  constant habit 
of sin and  suffering  and  brings  bout self-hatred. The 
process  in  consciousness  is  on  of self-destruction 
arising from the self-hatred.As a r  suit, one of the belief 
systems to give  up is  that guilt a  d  suffering have any 
particular value.As we go up the energy fields, we can 
see· that  those  who  approach  t  e  fields  of the  saints 
and  the  great  beings  are  gettin  closer  to  God  and 
farther from guilt, pain, and sufferIng.As we experience 
the  Ultimate  Reality,  we  go  thrhugh  the  doors  of a 
progressive  lovingness  becaUS!love  increases  and 
expands as one moves up throu 
joy and ecstasy to a 
state of peace. 

We have to give up worshipin  the god of suffering. 
Christians have to give  up solelyl worshiping the God 
of the  cruciflxion,  the  Christ  of the  cruciftxion,  and 
move on to the Christ of the resurrection.The message 
was  not that of death, sin, and  suffering. People who 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

319 

identify themselves as a body-the strict materialists­
look at the Christ on the cross as a body and come out 
with  pain,  sin,  guilt,  and  suffering. Was  that  the  mes­
sage?  Is  that what Christ died for,  to  teach everybody 
that  we  are  a  physical  body?  Or was  his  message  the 
direct opposite? His message was that we are not limited. 
We have to substitute our confused ideas and begin to 
look at moving towards a lovingness and a higher state 
of consciousness  to  learn  that  the  message  was  the 
Christ of the Resurrection. 

Now we have  to give  up  the  belief that penance, 

guilt, sin, and suffering are somehow of enormous spir­
itual benefit. Frankly, all the thousands of people I have 
clinically treated over fifty years who had chronic pain, 
guilt, sin, and suffering were the most selfish  and self­
centered  persons  I  have  ever met.  Chronic  pain  and 
suffering  does  not  make  people  enlightened,  loving 
beings. It usually makes them cranky, horrible, selfish, 
and  self-centered, which  brings  them  up  to  the  next 
level-that of self-pity. Most people with chronic pain 
are into self-pity, grief, 'poor me', and the endless fear 
of the continuation of the state, wondering if it is going 
to  get worse. They  continually  resist  it  and  have  the 
constant desire to get away from it. 

The  bottom  area  of  the  Map  of  Consciousness 
reflects  the  negative  energy  fields.  The  people  are 
very, very angry. The  anger of the  people in  chronic 
pain is enormous. They are stuck in it. Some are even 
proud of the fact  that nobody has been able  to help 
them. They grimly tell about all the doctors they have 
seen, all the treatments they have had, and how all of 
those things have not worked. 

320 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

It is  necessary to move up to Courage, which con­
tains the capacity to look at the fact that something can 
be done about the way we can be with the pain. The 
way to  be with it is  by using the  simple 'letting go  of 
resisting' and having  the willingness  to  do  so. Are  we 
willing to try something?  Do we  have  the  courage  to 
try letting  go  of resisting  the  pain  and  ending  up  at 
least detached from it in order to move out of this state 
of suffering? The  lower energy fields  are  all  negative 
states of suffering. 

The arrows of the energy fields above 200 all point 
upwards. This means there is less  and less sufferin~  as 
we move up into Joy. How can we be with that chr6niC 
condition? Can we be willing to be with it and let go of 
resisting  it?  Can we  begin  to  differentiate  and accept 
that we are that which is with the pain? Can we accept 
our capacity to be with it in a state of nonsuffering? 

When  looking  at  the  emotions  that  go  with  the 
energy fields below 200, we can see those that go with 
chronic  pain. There  are  self-hatred  and  the feeling  of 
being a victim. The process going on in consciousness 
is  a destructive one of hopelessness. We think nothing 
can be done  about our condition. It  is  worth remem­
bering the nature of the power of the mind-that what 
we  hold in mind literally  creates  our experience. The 
person  who  says,  "My  condition  is  hopeless"  then 
creates  a  condition  that  is  hopeless  and  resistive  to 
treatment. 

If the person in Grief moves up to Apathy, they are 
in a constant state of regret, with the feeling of loss and 
despondency. These are feelings  that are  only human. 
They are  not feelings  that anyone wants to feel  guilty 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

321 

about; they  are  feelings  people  want  to  understand. 
Through understanding, they become resolved. 

When I cut my thumb. off, I went through all these 
feelings.  First  was  the  feeling  that  I  was  somehow 
being punished or attacked by the forces of retribution 
or something similar. The pain was acute, and I looked 
at  it  and  felt  hopeless.  I  felt  despair  that  the  thumb 
could never be replaced, and so  on. I went into grief 
and mourning, as though I had lost a loved one. There 
was a fear of the consequences and a fear that the pain 
and  suffering  were  going  to  continue.  I  felt  myself 
resisting the desire to get away from the injury, the dis­
ability, the pain, the suffering, the surgery, and the rest 
of it. I  was feeling  angry-angry at life, at fate,  and at 
myself. These  feelings  are  understandable-they  are 
only very human.Then there was the moving into Pride 
that I was going to do something about it, and then into 
Courage to begin to look at the techniques that I knew 
work in this kind of circumstance. Next arose the will­
ingness to begin utilizing them and let go of resisting, 
and then using that technique to eventually move up 
into the acceptance of it so that if it is there, it is okay, 
and if it is not there, that is okay as well. 

Neutral  is  an  interesting  energy  field,  the  one  in 
which  we  say  it is  okay  either way. When we  totally 
release our resistance to the pain, we do not care if it is 
present or not. There are the willingness  to be forgiv­
ing and the desire to eventually move into compassion. 
There is  acceptance  of the human condition and  the 
human protoplasmic experience without being resent­
ful  about it, without going into self-pity, without being 
angry,  without being  prideful  and going  into  a 'make 

322 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

wrong',  and  without  attacking  ourself.  If we  do  this, 
then we can move up to an energy field called Love, or 
even joy. I can only go back to my personal experience 
of what is possible. When somebody shares their expe­
rience with us, we learn what is possible in human con­
sciousness. 

As I moved through this experience, I began to call 
on the Power greater than myself. I kept surrendering 
the  pain,  turning  it  over  to  that  Power.  1 remember 
going to the emergency room and informing them that 
1could not take anesthesia or analgesia of any kind.The 
surgeon was somewhat perplexed about how this was 
going to be handled, and 1 said, "I have my own ways." 
He  relaxed, feeling  that somehow the pain was being 
handled. 1 went within myself, detached, and let go  of 
resisting. I called upon the God of my own understand­
ing, that aspect of my greater Self.We can believe there 
is some energy field greater than the personal self that 
has  unlimited  power.  So  I  constantly  surrendered  to 
God throughout the procedure. When we are in a situ­
ation like that, overwhelmed by excruciating pain and 
suffering with all ¥e props pulled out, this is when we 
realize what we r~ally  believe in; it is  a great opportu­
nity for growth. 

I 

As 1 surrendertd and let go  of resisting the experi­
ence, suddenly it tas as though I was lifted out of my 
body, and I went fto a state of profound inner peace, 
an incredible state! of stillness, exquisite inner serenity, 
and  joy. 1 realized! that  something  other than  my per­
sonal self was han~ling the experience and the pain. 

What we have learned to do with chronic pain is to 
surrender  it  to  G@d,  or  to  whatever  one  believes  in 

i 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

323 

(e.g., angelic beings) to handle the pain for them.When 
this  is  done,  there  is  the  experience  of  something 
greater than the personal self that handles the pain. My 
personal experience was that some great energy came 
in  and  handled  it  for  me. We  call  it  a  great  energy 
because  we  can  verify  the  existence  of it. As  I  said, 
"God, I can't do it; you do it for me," I surrendered my 
burden  and  allowed  that which  is  in  the  universe  to 
handle it for me. 

For those  of you  to  whom this  may  seem like  an 
outlandish experience, we will look at if from  a  level 
that  would  be  understandable. At  the  level  of about 
540, healing begins to take place, and there is a release 
of endorphins  within  the  brain, They  are  the  neuro­
chemicals that are also released by narcotics. 

Subsequent  to  this  experience,  I  was  aware  that 
within me  something was  automatically handling  the 
pain which did not involve  my personal self at  all. As 
the intensity of the pain increased, within me was an 
energy field that expresses itself on the physical plane 
through the release  of endorphins. The power of that 
field was automatically handling the pain. The pain and 
suffering were completely and totally released, and in 
their  place  was  a  state  of infinite  inner  serenity  and 
peace. 

How can we augment our endeavors in these direc­
tions?  Certainly, we can do spiritual work, but all those 
processes, such as forgiveness, take a period of time. In 
the meantime, what can we do? Are there ancillary pro­
cedures, such as acupuncture and hypnosis, that playa 
part in the alleviation of pain? 

We  know  that  acupuncture  can  be  extremely 

324 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

effective. We  said  that  all  forms  of illnesses, pain, and 
suffering  are  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual. We  have 
just described how they are handled from the spiritual 
level. Previously, we  described  how they are  handled 
on the level of consciousness itself through the mind. 
Certainly, at the same time, we want to do what we can 
on  the  physical  level.  In  my  personal  experience, 
acupuncture has been extremely effective. I had duodenal 
ulcers for about twenty-five years that were intractable 
and incurable. I  had received  every treatment known 
to  medical  science, and  it was  only  a  matter  of time 
before it would be necessary to have a subtotal gastrec­
tomy  and  reparative  gastrointestinal  surgery,  a  major 
procedure. I  then tried acupuncture, and by the third 
treatment,  the  pain  and  suffering  left,  and  x-rays 
revealed that the chronic duodenal ulcers had healed. 
(They never recurred.) As a result, from personal experi­
ence,  I  would  certainly  suggest  acupuncture  for  a 
chronic, intractable condition. 

We  know that the  reliance  on analgesics  has  two 
negative  effects.  First,  because  it  is  such  a  magical, 
short-term solution, one never grows in consciousness. 
One gives away their power to the pill, the power that 
is  really  of one's  consciousness. When  one  gives  the 
power to  the pill, personal growth  stops. The  second 
negative  effect  is  the progressive  dependency on the 
analgesics or narcotics, which creates and compounds 
the whole problem with a challenge that may be more 
severe than the original situation. 

Another  useful  technique  is  hypnosis. Alternative 
medicine is now very interested in hypnosis as well as 
acupuncture. The most useful form  of hypnosis is self­

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

325 

hypnosis.  It  is  advisable  to  learn  it  for  oneself rather 
than needing to seek it from  another, for  reasons hav­
ing to do with the advancement of consciousness. It is 
a very simple process. One can use the hypnotic state, 
which  is  really  only  a  state  of high  suggestibility,  to 
learn the very things described previously. If one goes 
into an extremely relaxed  state  and  begins  to  experi­
ment and experience the truth of what has been pre­
sented above, the learning is much faster. In my experi­
ence with self and,others, the value  of self-hypnosis is 
that  it  enables  one  to  reach  a  level  of concentration 
that  is  not  otherwise  accessible.  In  that  suggestible 
state, one  is  capable  of degrees  of concentration  not 
available in an ordinary mental state. 

There is a  simple technique that people who have 
any  chronic  physical  condition  can  learn  to  use. 
Instead of the word 'hypnosis', which has all  kinds of 
associated  beliefs  and  meanings,  we  will  talk  about 
extreme relaxation in a state of heightened suggestibil­
ity and capacity to concentrate.Just sit or lie down in a 
very  comfortable  position  and  start  to  progressively 
relax.  Picture  yourself walking  down  a  series  of ten 
steps and  then say, "Level  l."That  announces that we 
are  about to do this procedure. Then say, "Level  2" and 
go deeper into relaxation. 

The tIrst step initiates the experience, and the next 
step allows some time to relax all the, muscles in your 
head. As  you  do  that, you will  notice  the  soreness  in 
your face and jaw muscles reflecting the tension of the 
day.Your cheeks are actually sore-just poke them and 
you will find that is true. Why are they sore? It is from 
the chronic tension of resisted feelings. 

326 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Allow yourself several minutes to relax your head; 
Then say, "Level 3." Now relax your neck. Relax all the 
tension in your neck and upper shoulders.Then say to 
yourself, "Level  4;' and move and relax your back and 
chest  muscles. As  you  say "Level  5,"  just  continue  to 
progressively relax, starting with the  biggest muscles 
and then moving  to  the smallest-the shoulders, the 
upper arms, the  lower arms, the hands, and then the 
fmgers. Say "Level 6" and allow your chest and torso to 
relax. With "Level  7,"  move  into  the  lower abdomen, 
relaxing all the tensions you have been holding there. 
Say "Level 8," move into the hips and buttocks area, and 
allow the deep relaxation.At "Level 9," allow that relax­
ation to flow down your legs. Now say "Level  10" and 
allow  your feet  to  relax. Next  say "I  am  at level  10." 
Using that letting go of resistance, allow yourself to let 
go of all resistance to this profound state of relaxation. 
Surprisingly,  it  will  be  discovered  that  no  matter 
how seemingly complete the state of relaxation seems 
to be, there is yet another, even deeper level. By going 
through  progressively  deeper  levels,  it  is  discovered 
that one has never really, really been totally relaxed in 
their entire lifetime while awake. 

In this profound state of relaxation, now tell your­
self the  things you want  to  know  and  then let go  of 
resisting them. Let go of resisting the thought that pain 
is one thing and suffering is something else.There is no 
such thing as  suffering in  pain when that pain is  not 
resisted. In that profoundly relaxed state now, go back 
to the previous information to deal with chronic pain. 
Notice that the pain is everywhere, and notice that you 
can let go of your resistance to that pain.You can open 

PAIN  AND  SUFFERING 

327 

the  door and  let  it  happen  without  its  affecting  that 
which you really are. In it, you can begin to move your­
self up to a  lovingness for  yourself and a  compassion 
for your intrinsic beauty as a human being. 

At  an ener~ field  of about 500 to 540, the loving­
ness comes forth. We know that it has happened when 
we  become  lighthearted  about  the  situation  and  can 
laugh  at  ourself. There  is  the  energy  field  of humor, 
which  is  higher. The  fact  that  humor heals  has  been 
reported  in  books  by  celebrities  who  have  healed  a 
physical  illness  through the  constant use  of laughter. 
The choosing of laughter and humor and putting our­
self in a  loving, laughing energy field  that is  over 500 
tends  to  bring healing  out of its  own nature. There is 
the capacity to laugh at the misfortune, which means 
that the experience is one thing, and that which we are 
in truth is  something else. We  are  not the experience 
nor at the effect of it. We  are no longer the victim and 
have stopped struggling with it and resisting it. 

In  going  through  Neutral  and Willingness  to  the 
level ofAcceptance, we notice a release from suffering, 
and what does that mean? When we are resisting  and 
trying  to  get  away  from  it, we  are  at  a  lower energy 
field and see the process as one of entrapment.As long 
as we resist the  suffering  and pain, as  long  as  we  are 
angry, grit our teeth, struggle against it, and try to force 
our will, we become further enmeshed in it. It's like  a 
quagmire-the more we struggle, the more entrapped 
we become. To  move  up to the higher energy field  of 
freedom  means  to  be  released  from  the  entrapment 
and become empowered.The courage to face the issue 
and  do  something  about  it  brings  empowerment. 

328 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Willingness  moves  us  up  to  a  transformation  of 
consciousness and into the willingness to be forgiving, 
loving, and compassionate. We  can transcend this  and 
literally move beyond identification with the body and 
what  has  happened  to  it  into  a  conscious  awareness 
that we are something other than the body. 

In another chapter, we will talk about letting go of 

resistance so completely that there is very little aware­
ness of the body even being present.This also happens 
with pain in which the  thought, memory, and  aware­
ness  that  there  is  some  pain  only  happens  for  a  few 
fleeting seconds during the day. I have used the thumb 
only  as  an example  of the realness  of what I  am pre­
senting. The  pain came  to me for  only  a  few  seconds 
throughout  the  day  when  it  was  still  present. After 
about an hour, I suddenly noticed the thumb and said, 
"Oh, it's like I'm not even aware  of its presence."That 
occurred maybe a few other times during the day. In a 
twenty-four-hour period, the total amount of suffering 
I  experienced  that  the  world  would  call  painful 
amounted to maybe five or ten seconds in the morning 
and maybe a few seconds in the afternoon. The totality 
of  the  suffering  that  came  out  of  this  experience, 
which lasted for only a few months, amounted to prob­
ably less than thirty seconds. It is valuable for all of us 
to  do  this  because  through  doing  it,  we  realize  the 
truth of who we really are. 

Another assist to healing pain or any other distress 

is to listen to great, beautiful music, which itself releas­
es endorphins in the brain.That beauty provides a heal­
ing  effect  has  been  known  since  the  days  of 
Hippocrates. 

CHAPTER  11 

Losing Weight 

Is  there  a  way to  let go  of weight in  a  way  that is 
practical, easygoing, joyful, and  free  from  any  kind 
of  suffering?  Can  this  be  done? Yes!  All  it  takes  is 
about an hour or an hour and a half of our attention 
over a  day or two during  the time we  are  doing  the 
things  we  normally do. The  benefits  are  long  lasting 
for a lifetime! The reward for a couple of hours of just 
paying  attention to  a  few  simple  principles  is  a  life­
time of freedom from this challenge. How do I know 
it  works?  Because  it  has  worked  for  everyone  who 
has tried it. It has worked for my patients and for me. 
I  permanently  lost  fifty  pounds  by  using  this  very 
simple technique that emerged out of consciousness 
research. 

The  alleviation  of  a  problem  should  be  simple, 
direct, to the point, long lasting in its effect, and cost 
nothing. Diets  usually  do  not work in  the  long  run. 
The  usual  techniques  that  people  try  often  bring 
about  feelings  of guilt  and  recrimination. They  may 
work,  but  only  temporarily  because  they  do  not really 
modify the way one is  with their body since they do 
not  change those  Pavlovian  reflexes  that drive  one's 
eating despite one's best intentions. 

It was  discovered that a  shift  in the state  of con­
sciousness occurs in the process of eating, and that a 
person  can  easily  overcome  it  so  the  weight  loss 
becomes permanent.The message is to give up trying 
will power, give  up dieting, and give up resisting eat­
ing.Those methods usually do not work; they make us 
miserable, and we frequently end up the same as  we 

329 

330 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

were anyway. There is a much easier way that is truly 
joyful. 

Through  an  understanding  of  some  very  simple 

concepts that have been presented previously in rela­
tion to the Map of Consciousness, we are then put in 
a  place  of being  able  to  handle  problems  that  have 
been baffling and unsuccessful in the past. 

Through the use of some techniques based upon 
the nature of consciousness itself, we can learn how 
to  imagine  ourself as  slim, energize  that  image,  and 
then  let  go  of it  so  that  it actually materializes. It  is 
necessary  to  learn  how  to  come  from  the  heart 
instead of the head, and to come from love instead of 
the stomach. The head criticizes us because the stom­
ach wants to eat. The only way to handle this problem 
is  to come from the heart about the whole situation. 
We are going to be somewhat lighthearted about this 
subject that many people get quite  distressed  about. 
The lightheartedness comes with the eating; the self­
recrimination and guilt appear later. We lie in bed and 
wonder, "Why  did  I  eat  all  that?"  and  then  begin  to 
attack ourself. There  is  a  way beyond  all  these prob­
lems that will work for all of us. 

The  medical  model  commonly followed  is  really 
based on the idea of diet and the assumption that the 
number of calories one eats determines one's weight. 
There  may  be  some  thought about  exercise  as  well. 
However, the following information is not necessarily 
going  to  agree  with  traditional  medical  thinking.  If 
traditional medical thinking and counting calories had 
worked for you, you would not be interested in this 
information. We  are  going  to present  things  that we 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

331 

have clinically observed as being true experientially. 

Consciousness  work has  to  do with the  truth  of 
our inner experience. It does not have anything to do 
with theory, hypotheses, scientific reasoning, or logic. It 
has to do with the experiencing of the truth within us. 
The  first  thing  to  do  is  to begin  to  cancel  some 
beliefs about diets and food that have  contributed to 
our  problem.  To  begin  With,  we  have  beliefs  and 
thoughts, such as, "Well, being overweight runs in our 
family-it's in the genes." Or, "It's due to my thyroid," 
or, "It's  due  to  the fact  that  as  an  infant, I  was  over­
weight, and that caused too many fat cells."These are 
all  popular medical  theories, and if holding  those  in 
mind works for you, then that is very good. However, 
we have found experientially that this really is not so. 
As  an example, two people can eat an identical diet, 
and  one  will  gain  weight  and  the  other will  lose  it. 
How can that  be  explained inasmuch  as  the  activity 
levels  and  everything  else  are  about  the  same? This 
brings  about  the  questioning  of  some  of the  basic 
medical hypotheses, a few of which are very simple to 
understand. 

First, why  assume  that  the  body fully  absorbs all 

the calories it consumes? Why think that the gastroin­
testinal tracts of two different people are exactly the 
same? I may eat a 1,OOO-calorie piece of pie and absorb 
only 500 calories, with the other 500 running right on 
through. There  are  other factors,  such. as  the  rate  of 
movement in the gastrointestinal tract. We  know that 
the  faster  things  move  through  the  tract, the  less  it 
absorbs.There are factors other than calories to consider, 
and in  doing  so, we  will  arrive  at  a  way of handling 

332 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

this problem that will not involve counting calories. 

There  are  some  dietary tricks  that  are  helpful  to 
use in the beginning until the  results  of working  on 
ourself have  adjusted  our appestat, which is  located 
in a  portion of the brain called the  hypothalamus. It 
takes  a  day or two to  reset the appestat, which con­
trols our feeling  of satiety. The  adjusted appestat will 
control  our weight. As  we  hold  a  certain  weight  in 
mind, it begins to materialize on the physical plane. It 
is helpful to understand the power of mind over body 
and that what is held in mind creates the body's being 
what it is, rather than the other way around. 

It  is  necessary  to  reverse  the  conventional,  so­
called 'common sense' of the left-brain logic that says 
it is the body that creates the mind. Instead, we have 
to look at the opposite, which is that what is  held in 
mind  manifests  within  the  body.  Our  thoughts  and 
beliefs about weight, activity, calories, and all the phec 
nomena  surrounding  this  have  been  affecting  our 
weight.  For  example,  the  following· is  known  from 
cases  of  patients  with  multiple  personalities.  One 
personality appears in the patient and takes over the 
consciousness named Richard, who does not have any 
eating or weight problems at all. In fact, he eats very 
little, is  spry and  active,  and while  Richard  is  in  the 
body, the person is loses weight and becomes slim. 

Then  the  person  goes  into  a  trance  state  or 
becomes  intoxicated,  and  William  comes  into  the 
body. William loves to eat, gorging himself on all kit;lds 
of things,  and  the  body's  weight  suddenly increases 
dramatically. Now we can see that the response of the 
body  is  therefore  to  the  mind-the  mindset,  the 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

333 

mind's  belief  and  attitude,  and  the  way  the  person 
holds the relationship to their body in their mind. It is 
the mind that sets the appestat. It is using conscious­
ness  techniques  within  the  mind  that  release  the 
weight  problems, and  one  can let  go  of the  weight 
almost automatically. 

We  will review the nature  of consciousness itself 
and the  relationship  between body, mind, and  spirit, 
with  spirit  being  the  energy  field  of consciousness 
that is  all pervasive  throughout life  itself. It is  impor­
tant  to  understand that the  body has  no  capacity to 
experience itself. At first this seems amazing because 
most of us, unless we are enlightened, assume that we 
are  the  physical  body. We  must realize  that the  body 
has no way to experience itself.The arm cannot expe­
rience  the  arm  nor  can  the  leg  experience  the  leg. 
Instead,  they  have  to  be  experienced  in  something 
greater than themselves. We  experience the body via 
the senses, which tell us what is going on within it.As 
the  senses  of the  body  have  no  capacity  to  experi­
ence  themselves,  they  have  to  be  experienced  in 
something  greater  than  what  they  are,  which  is  in 
mind itself, so the mind is the place where the sensa­
tions in the body are experienced. 

Mind  itself  is  incapable  of experiencing  itself. A 
thought cannot experience its own thoughtness, nor 
can a memory experience its own memoryness.A fan­
tasy of the future cannot experience itself, nor can an 
emotion experience itself. What goes on in the mind 
has  to  be  experienced  in  something  that  is  greater 
than the mind, that is, in consciousness itself.There is 
the  body's  experience  via  sensation.  Sensation  is 

334 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

experienced  in  the  mind,  and  the  mind  is  experi­
enced in consciousness. This  can be seen very easily, 
for example, when something happens to a portion of 
the brain, and the person is  unable to experience the 
opposite side of the body. 

Without  mind, the  body  cannot  be  experienced. 
The whole pOint of anesthesia illustrates that without 
consciousness, one is not aware of what is going on in 
mind. If consciousness  is  deleted via  the  anesthetic, 
there is no knowledge of the experience that is going 
on in either mind or body, so consciousness is higher 
than both of them. There is a state beyond conscious­
ness itself that is  still, unmoving, and allows  us  to be 
aware of what is going on in consciousness; it is called 
the  state  of awareness. The  state  of awareness  is  an 
aspect  of the  greater,  powerful  energy  field  behind 
consciousness, which is  the  energy of life  itself. This 
is  necessary  to  know  in  order  to  become  aware  of 
where all experience takes place. 

All  human experience is  taking place within con­
sciousness itself. Consequently, we cannot experience 
the wall, the floor, or someone else. Instead, what we 
experience  is  within  our  own  consciousness  of the 
wall, the floor, or another person.This gives an under­
standing of an area in which we can work that is less 
restricted by commonly held belief systems. 

If the  entire  weight  problem  is  a  phenomenon 
occurring within  consciousness, then consciousness 
is more powerful than the mind, which is more pow­
erful than the senses, which are  more powerful than 
the body; therefore, we can bring about a shift in the 
body by merely addressing that consciousness. If we 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

335 

address the problem there, because the body will only 
do what is held in mind, then we really do not have to 
bother much with the body; it will just automatically 
correct itself because the problem is really a problem 
within the experience within consciousness itself. 

The techniques we use have to do with the mind 

and consciousness, so we do not have to be very con­
cerned with handling the body as such.The body is an 
effect of what happens in the mind. Consequently, the 
attempts  to  solve  the  weight  problem,  which  are 
addressed to the body only, are notoriously unsuccessful. 
Nearly  every  month, there  are  headlines  on  endless 
magazine covers and in newspapers that are selling a 
new diet. This  lets  us  know  that  diets  do  not  work. 
When there  are  multiple  solutions to a  problem and 
endless articles  on the same phenomenon, it is  obvi­
ous  they  do  not  have  the  answer.  If there  were  an 
answer  to  the  weight  problem, there  would  not  be 
any  articles  on  diets  at  all  because  everyone  would 
have  handled  it. Addressing  it  on  the  physical  level 
alone just does not work. It also does not work for any 
other  problems  that  involve  complicated  human 
behavior. 

Problems  such as  alcoholism  and  many illnesses, 

including duodenal ulcers and diverticulitis, are noto­
riously  nonresponsive  to  being  addressed  on  the 
physical level only. We have to become more sophisti­
cated  and  conscious  to  bring  about  a  resolution  of 
long-standing behavioral problems. 

The  technique,  which  I  used  personally  to  lose 
thirty percent of my body weight (ftfty pounds) some 
years  ago, enabled me to reach my desired weight. It 

336 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

only takes a matter of minutes over a day or two-col­
lectively, about only sixty to ninety minutes of a per­
son's  time  and  attention. You  can  actually  do  this 
while  you  are  going  about  your  daily  activities  at 
home  or in  the  office,  and  even while  driving  back 
and forth to work. It works right into your life and eas­
ily fits into your daily routine.You do not have to stop 
your life  in  order to  use  this  technique. In  order for 
something to be effective, it has to fit in with your life 
pattern. We  found  that  any  behavioral  modification 
technique works if it fits  in with a person's daily life. 
If you have to change your whole lifestyle, the results 
are then usually temporary. 

With  this  technique,  when  the  sensation  arises 
that you had previously called hunger, you ignore the 
thoughts  that  go  with  this, especially  canceling  that 
thought of hunger. Instead, you go right into the sen­
sation, directly into the inner experience of what you 
are  actually  experiencing. You  go  to  where  you  are 
experiencing it without labeling it, naming it, or call­
ing it anything. You just experience it and begin to let 
go  of resisting  those  sensations. You  silently  go  into 
consciousness  itself,  into  the  inner  experience  of 
what you are experiencing, and let go of resisting it. 

In  the  beginning  we  are  so  controlled  by  the 
Pavlovian  conditioning  that  the  minute  we  feel  the 
sensation, we label it 'hunger'. Our behavior goes into 
immediate  action to  satisfy it. Like  Pavlov's  dog  that 
salivated  every time  the  bell  rang, we  have  set up  a 
conditioned reflex that we now want to unset. How 
can  we  unset  it,  how long  does  this  take,  and  how 
much effort is  required? 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

337 

Actually  it  takes  very  little  effort  and  very  little 
time. When we get this sensation, which was labeled 
as 'hungry' in the past (I'm 'hungry' now), we let go of 
labeling  and  resisting  the  sensation  itself.  We  just 
agree and are willing to be with the sensation but to 
do nothing about it. We let the experience run within 
us and are willing to be with that inner experience or 
sensation of whatever it is. Some people may sense it 
in  the  stomach, and  some  may  sense  it  as  sort  of a 
physical weakness.Whatever sensation is felt, we stop 
talking  about  it in  our minds; we  stop  languaging  it 
and  giving  it  a  label.  Instead,  we  go  into  the  inner 
experience and let go of resisting  it. In letting  go  of 
the resistance, we can move up to a higher level, if we 
are willing to choose it, and say to ourselves, "I  want 
more of whatever that is." 

The  reason  for  that  and  the  way  it  becomes 
acceptable is because there is a limited amount of the 
sensation that comes up. The mind thinks, "If I  don't 
satisfy this, I'm going to have this hungry feeling  con­
tinuously:' That  is  not  so  because  the  feeling  results 
from  resisting  it. When we  go  with  it, like  in the Tao 
where the willow tree bends with the wind but does not 
break, there is no resistance. Instead of being the oak 
tree that resists the sensation, tries to fight it with will 
power  and  then  breaks,  we  can  be  like  the  willow 
tree, going with the sensation and letting go of resist­
ing it. In fact, we welcome it. It is like we are  saying, 
"More."We want more wind, more of this inner expe­
rience.As we call forth more of this, sit with the inner 
feeling, and just be with it, it will run out. 

It is a good idea to start this process on a weekend 

338 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

when at home  and  we  can  stop  everything  and  just 
sit, or better, lie down and focus on it. If we do not let 
anything distract us from being with the sensation, it 
will  suddenly disappear in a  matter of minutes. After 
it disappears, we can go about our business. After we 
become  used  to  this  technique, we  do  not  have  to 
stop any activities at all. When the experience comes 
up, we just sit or lie down, concentrate on it, and fix 
attention  on welcoming  it. It is  like  we  are  opening 
the barn door and allowing the sensation to come in 
willingly, being with it but not doing anything about it. 
We  want to break the cycle of labeling the sensa­
tion as 'hunger' when it appears and then satisfying it 
with food. Doing that just reinforces the cycle, making 
ourself the  victim  and  at  the  effect  of that behavior 
pattern. Instead of that, the self stands aside from this 
sensation  and  begins  to  master it  so  that we  are  no 
longer at the effect of it; we becomes the master. 

.In  Zen,  there  is  the  famous  series  of ox-herding 
pictures.The ftrst picture shows a monk hanging onto 
a  rope that is  attached to the ox, and the ox is drag­
ging  him  across  the  ground. The  monk's  knees  are 
bruised, his ears are bleeding, and he is a mess. In the 
next picture, the monk has the ox tied to a tree with 
the rope. The monk has caught the ox and identifted 
the problem. In the third picture, the monk is  riding 
on top of the ox. He has become the master. He is no 
longer the victim  at  the  effect  of it.  HoW  did he do 
that?  That  is  what  this  process  is  all  about. We  are 
going  to  tether this  ox right  now by identifying  the 
pattern that has to be handled, and then we are going 
to be on top of it. The person that we are now stands 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

339 

independently  above  and  beyond  and  becomes  the 
master of this very simple thing to solve. It is  merely 
the willingness to experience what, in the beginning, 
may seem like some discomfort, or, in other words, to 
experience  this  sensation  without  satiating  it  right 
away.As we do this, the reflex weakens. 

But  what  do  we  do  about  our eating  during  the 
day?  We  do  what  is  called  'anticipatory  eating'.  It 
means to never eat when we are hungry.The first two 
days, and probably for the ftrst week or two, we never 
allow ourself to eat when we are hungry. Instead, we 
let  go  of the  hungriness  by  using  this  radical-truth 
technique and anticipating the periods of hunger. We 
know our own hunger patterns, so instead of waiting 
until we are hungry and then eating, thus reinforcing 
the  pattern,  we  anticipate  the  hunger  periods. We 
know  that  habitually  we  will  be  hungry  around  six 
o'clock, so instead of waiting until we are hungry and 
satisfying it, thereby reinforcing our conditioning, we 
anticipate it.At 4:45  PM, when we are  not even hungry 
yet, we have a cheese sandwich. 

The  technique  is  simple-eat  when  we  are  not 
hungry and do not eat when we are, thus substituting 
this technique for the hunger pattern. How long will 
it take before we disappear hunger, and what is going 
to happen? We .will  no  longer experience  hunger or 
appetite; they just seem to  disappear. By  the second 
day, we will notice that the pattern is already so weak 
that we will barely notice it. How many minutes a day 
will this take?  It may take a  total of thirty minutes on 
the  ftrst  day. You  will  notice  that  if you  do  nothing 
about the hunger sensation and really let go of resist­

340 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ing  it, it will  disappear in  a  matter of minutes. After 
doing this a number of times, the sensation will disap­
pear in a  matter of seconds. We  will know that if we 
sit down and let go of resisting the sensation, it is over 
in seconds, and we are no longer at the effect of the 
appetite. We  are  no  longer  driven  by  it  and  can  be 
absolutely free  of it. 

In  place  of  this  pattern,  we  may  feel  a  sort  of 
blankness  or  emptiness.  Where  there  once  was 
hunger and the  drive  to  eat, along with an appetite, 
enthusiasm  about  it,  and  then  the  satiation,  it  now 
seems  like  nothing  is  going  on in  that  space  in  our 
life. Now we can do  some  other pleasurable  activity, 
such as  rewarding ourself by taking the time to read 
the  book we  have  been  wanting  to  read  and  never 
had the time. Now that we are not out in the kitchen 
eating all the time, there is time to read for enjoyment 
instead of feeling  guilty because we have  more impor­
tant things to do. We  can discover something we really 
enjoy doing. 

One thing to do, for instance, is  to take a  nap. All 
the time spent shopping for food, preparing it, eating 
it, and cleaning up afterward can take up a great part 
of the day.With this new pattern, it gives us time for a 
short nap. After a  twenty-minute  nap, we feel  fantas­
tic. After  a  twenty-minute  hunger  engorgement,  we 
usually do not feel fantastic; instead, we feel horrible. 
We  just  had four  Milky Ways,  a  caramel  sundae, and 
finished off a piece of cheese and now, instead of feel­
ing happy, we feel guilty. 

The  way  off the  guilt  trip  is  to  really  know  that 
there is  a very simple technique. It sounds so simple, 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

341 

but that is why it works.The things that are extraordi­
narily  complicated  are  generally  far  from  the  truth. 
The  truth  is  usually  amazingly  simple. As  people  at 
Alcoholics  Anonymous  have  discovered,  they  stay 
away from one drink one day at a time. It sounds too 
simple.The intellect says, "Nonsense! I know that."The 
intellect knows this  but the self does not know that. 
We  only  know  a  thing  from  personal  validation 
through our own inner experience. 

It usually takes  exactly  one  day to get off eating, 

hunger, and appetite if we  allow ourself to be repro­
grammed. We will notice that as  time goes on, weare 
beginning to look forward to meals and starting to get 
into the habit pattern of getting hungry and satisfying 
the  feeling.  It  is  very  simple  to  back  off  and  just 
release ourself by using this technique a few times.AlI 
we  have  to  do is  allow that feeling  of hungriness  to 
come up, be with it, welcome it, and wait till it runs 
out, which handles it (usually five minutes or less).We 
might have to do it again if we have really gotten into 
holiday indulgence for a number of years. 

There is another thing that happens as we do this. 
There is  a  center in the hypothalamus at the base of 
the  brain  called  the 'appestat'. It  sets  our degree  of 
satiety and the  amount of satiety that we  search for. 
The less we eat, the  more we turn down the  setting 
on the appestat. Satiety is  something else  that is  not 
really  understood  by  traditional  scientific  medicine. 
Scientific medicine talks about calories as though one 
calorie were the same as  any other calorie. However, 
we know that satiety plays a great role in our hunger 
and weight problems. Satiety is  more important than 

342 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

calories; therefore, the diet I follow would make most 
people who follow diets faint. However, I know what 
creates  a  feeling  of satiety  within  myself,  such  as  a 
hamburger smothered in onions. By  the time I finish 
that, I am totally filled up, satisfied with meat, cheese, 
and similar foods. Cheese  is  not on anybody's reduc­
ing diet. We  know that cheese has  a  satiety factor, so 
once  one  has  eaten  a  certain  amount  of it,  the 
appetite is satisfied. 

We  also  know that calories  are  released  at  differ­
ent  rates.  Fats,  for  instance,  are  released  at  one  rate 
and protein at another. We know that it takes a certain 
number of calories to burn up every gram of protein, 
so .one  of  the  tricks  we  can  use  to  speed  up  the 
process of weight reduction is to go for a high-protein 
diet. This is  not about diet, but I  will  just throw in  a 
few tricks that I have observed clinically. 

Eating  sugar  on  an  empty  stomach  is  seriously 
deleterious  to  the  goals  of  the  program. Why?  The 
body takes sugar in so fast that it is absorbed very rap­
idly and cannot be metabolized quickly so it just has 
to be stored as fat within the body. One thing to do for 
our own sake as part of caring and loving ourselves is 
to avoid sugar and sweets when introducing this pro­
gram into our lives. In the beginning, we want to see 
a fast result. I believe we should have the satisfaction 
of  doing  this  now  and  seeing  some  returns  and 
rewards,  including  seeing  the  image  that  we  have 
been holding of ourself coming into manifestation. 

It is. best  to  avoid  things  that  have  a  high  sugar 
content,  especially  on  an  empty  stomach,  because 
sugar  stimulates  the  production  of  insulin,  which 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

343 

then brings the blood sugar down rapidly, thus recre­
ating  the  hunger  sensation. In  contrast, one-third  of 
the  calories  of  protein  are  burned  up  just  by  the 
process  of metabolizing protein. Therefore, one  hun­
dred calories of sugar equal one hundred calories of 
fat,  whereas  one  hundred  calories  of excess  protein 
converts t<,>  only sixty-six calories' worth of fat. A high­
protein diet results in a thirty-three percent discount 
(not recommended for people with gout). Notice that 
carnivores are slim. But what about vegetarians? They 
can also avoid sugar and starch and yet stick to a high­
protein diet. 

The technique  is to let go of resisting and to dis­
appear hunger and appetite. We  then live  in a  world 
where we are  no longer in the  cycle. We  get used to 
an eating cycle of overeating, feeling  guilty about the 
overeating,  and  then  trying  to  control  it.  Then  up 
comes hunger, and with the hunger come guilt, then 
appetite, then  the  expectation  of satiation, followed 
by overindulgence, and guilt again, so there is an end­
less  self-defeating cycle. The  only way to beat it is to 
rise above it, transcend it, and be beyond it. By disap­
pearing it, one will find that appetite and hunger actu­
ally  disappear,  and  there  is  the  experience  of never 
being hungry. 

The  next thing  the mind says  is, "I  don't want  to 
give  up  the  pleasure  of eating."  Quite  the  contrary. 
What  happens  to  the  enjoyment  of eating  once  we 
use this technique is that the appetite arises only out 
of  the  act  of  eating  itself  rather  than  anticipatory 
appetite. I can sit down with no hunger or appetite at 
all, but the minute I  begin to  eat, it creates appetite, 

344 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

and the pleasure of eating is greater than it ever was. 
I  enjoy food  now more  than I  ever  did. Eating  is  no 
longer accompanied by guilt or self-blame.There is no 
anxiety  about  eating  too  many  calories  or  gaining 
weight from eating.AlI that is gone, so we do not give 
up the pleasure of eating at all. We fmd that when we 
are  not hungry, the food  is  considerably more enjoy­
able.  We  start  enjoying  the  cheese  sandwich  the 
minute we take that first bite.We are not even hungry. 
We pick up the cheese sandwich, bite into it, and the 
enjoyment is there.There is no loss of enjoyment. I do 
not believe  in letting go  of enjoyment and pleasure; 
on  the  contrary,  I  believe  in  increasing  it.  So  now 
there is the enjoyment and pleasure of eating as well 
as the enjoyment, pleasure, and justified pride in hav­
ing a  body that is  more  appropriate to our aesthetic 
ambition-how we would like to look. 

The first thing to handle is the cycle of eating and 
getting  hungry. We  are  the  victims  of  a  behavioral 
pattern, a  conditioning  that  has  nothing  to  do  with 
will power or morality. We  can condition any kind of 
animal  in  this  way. What  has  happened  is  a  sort  of 
Pavlovian-dog  conditioning  that  has  nothing  to  do 
with  our personality or self-worth. It has  nothing to 
do  with  being  self-indulgent,  with  oral  narcissistic 
needs,  or  with  whatever  the  psychoanalytic  theory 
might  be, such as  oral aggression  or oral passivity. It 
merely has to do with a  simple, very primary type of 
conditioning that has been favored in our society. 

We  picked up those patterns in our social condi­
tioning as children, that is all.We will discuss the part 
that  the  child  plays  in  this  and  arrive  at  a  different 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

345 

way of looking at the whole eating pattern. The mind 
experiences the body, and consciousness experiences 
mind; therefore, we  really  experience  within  in  our 
consciousness  what  we  formally  called  'hunger'. 
Where is that localized? You will notice that it is only 
a  belief system that is experienced in the stomach. It 
is  actually  experienced in  a  generalized  way,  sort  of 
everywhere. The  thought that it is  in  the  stomach is 
just  a  belief  system  from  childhood. As  mentioned 
previously,  the  body  cannot  experience  anything. 
What is  happening is  experienced in a  more diffuse, 
generalized area. 

Another technique of letting go of suffering at any 
time from pain, illness, or physical symptoms, such as 
hunger, is  knowing  that  it  is  nothing  but  a  physical 
symptom. You  will  notice  that it is  experienced in a 
general, diffuse  manner, sort of everywhere, because 
that  is  where  we  experience  all  experience  rather 
than  in  a  localized  situation. The  localization  comes 
from  a  strong  belief  system.  We  all  have  these 
thoughts from childhood. As we let go of resisting the 
energy of this sensation, it becomes diffuse and finally 
disappears. 

On the  Map  of Consciousness, we  see  the  lower 
feelings  at  the  bottom,  and  when  we  move  up  to 
Desire, which has been running the appetite-hunger­
satiation cycle, we  notice  that it  has  an  energy field 
that calibrates at 125 and is in a negative direction. In 
other words, it has  a  deleterious effect on our lives. 
The emotions that go with this energy field are want­
ing, craving, and all the addictions. Therefore, calling a 
weight  problem a  food  addiction is  partially correct 

346 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

in that the characteristics of the negative energy field 
at  125  are  feelings  of wantingness, desiringness, and 
cravingness,  and  the  processing  occurring  in  con­
sciousness is  entrapment. The  person therefore feels 
like  a  victim, and  due  to  the  downward  direction  of 
the energy field, there are negative feelings about the 
self having to do with the whole cycle. 

As  we  let go  of resisting  it  and go  beyond it, we 
start moving  up  the  scale  to  the  level  of Courage  in 
order to handle the problem of pride in our willing­
ness to look at it. When we move upward and get off 
this  cycle  at level  250, we  become  detached. At  that 
point, the process going on in consciousness is one of 
being  released.  Because  the  energy  field  now goes 
upward, we have  a  good, positive feeling, one that is 
constructive  and makes  us feel  better. It has  a  lot of 
power in it. 

How do we experience that detachment? It is the 
experience similar to if we eat, it is okay, and if we do 
not, that is okay, too. People ask, "Do you want to eat 
something  now?" I  say, "Well, if iYOU  are  going  to fix 
something,  fme." Then  they  will  ask,  "What  do  you 
want to eat? Do you want to eat fish, or macaroni, or 
baked  beans?"  I'll  say,  "Well,  either  way."  When  one 
reaches  this  level  of handling  appetite  and  hunger, 
one is no longer really fixed on one particular food or 
another.  One  could  say, "If we  have  a  steak  tonight, 
that's  fme,  and  if we  don't, that's  fme."  So  it is  okay 
either way. This means that one is free. 

One  characteristic  of  this  attitude  is  freedom. 
Freedom from what? There is freedom from being run 
by  a  program  or  a  conditioning,  and  freedom  from 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

347 

being a victim ofthe cycle.There is freedom from the 
entrapment that made us feel bad about ourselves.As 
we get detached from  these  sensations, we  begin to 
feel  good  about ourselves. In fact, our willingness  to 
do-that goes up to level 310, which has an even better 
feeling about it.We begin to accept that this is nothing 
other  than  a  phenomenon,  just  a  set  of  vibrations 
going on within consciousness. It does not have to do 
with  food  or  the  body.  Those  are  all  programs.  In 
essence, physics  explains it as just a set of vibrations 
going on in the field of consciousness that are within 
our power  to  alter.  Once  we  do  that, we  can  really 
begin to love ourselves more than we did before. 

There is  another very interesting aspect going on 
in  consciousness  that will  also  be  very  helpful. It  is 
something  you  can  observe  within  yourself,  and 
something  I  picked  up  within  myself and  saw  hap­
pening. The  cycle  in  the  past was  to  be  run  by the 
hunger, appetite, satiation, and then guilt.AlI the good 
intentions I  had  about  dieting  and  taking  off weight 
suddenly  flew  out  the  window  and  disappeared 
somewhere.After ftiling myself up with far more than 
I knew I needed, suddenly there was a feeling of self­
disgust and guilt. People with severe eating problems 
often  experience  that. They  go  into  the  bathroom, 
throw  all  the  food  back  up,  and  then  go  into  self­
hatred,  blame,  guilt,  and  even  suicidal  depression, 
which can become very severe. What really happens 
in this type of situation? I observed that when a  per­
son sits  down to  eat, it is  only the  adult within who 
wants to take off the weight, and it is really the 'inner 
child' who is always hungry. 

348 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

In the past, Dr. Eric Berne, author of Games People 
Play and creator of Transactional Analysis, along with 
other  people  in  that  field,  talked  about  our  'child', 
'adult',  and  'parent'  tapes  that  are  like  three  voices 
within us. One  is  the  desirous  child; one is  the adult 
who  is  rational, intelligent, and  educated; and  one  is 
the parent who  tends to  be  punitive  and  moralistic. 
The  parent tape  is  the  one  that  tells  us  about  right 
and wrong. When we sit down at the table or walk to 
the  refrigerator,  the  adult  within  goes  unconscious 
and the child takes over. 

What  does  a  child  know  about  diet, weight, and 
calories? Nothing.The consciousness of the child is, "I 
want, I  satisfy, and I  get," so we go  to the refrigerator 
without  realizing  we  are  in  a  different  state  of con­
sciousness,  one  in  which  the  child  is  dominant.  So 
who is poking around in the refrigerator? The child is. 
Who is ordering a second hot fudge sundae or having 
a  second  helping  of potatoes  and  gravy?  The  child. 
After  we indulge  the  child without  realizing  what is 
going  on, when the  meal  is  over, the  child  leaves. It 
has had its fill, and then who takes its place? The par­
ent does who then says, "How could you have been so 
stupid? Why did you have seconds? So  did you have a 
piece of pie? Why did you put ice cream on top of the 
pie? I mean, think of the calories.You are really stupid 
and weak; you don't have any will power. You are no 
good; your self-worth is rotten." 

At this point, we are subjected to the inner angry 
parent  who  is  blaming  us.  Blaming  whom?  Blaming 
the inner child.Where has the adult been all this time? 
It has been silenced. The adult was not there at meal­

LOSING  WEIGHT 

349 

time or after mealtime. The child and the parent have 
taken over the whole eating program, which is natural 
because that is where the eating patterns get set up in 
the first place.They get set up with the child, and who 
is sitting next to the child but the parent? So the child 
alternates with the parent in running the whole eating 
pattern. 

In  order to  counteract this, we  have  to be aware 
that the pattern is running. Just to be aware of it begins 
to change it. Now we can make a note to ourself, put 
it on the table or the refrigerator, and consciously call 
forth our adult and tell the child, "This is the place for 
an adult now because my adult is very conscious of its 
eating."  My  adult  knows  about  calories,  diets,  and 
healthy  eating  patterns.  I  consciously  call  forth  my 
adult  to  be here  at  this  meal. I  say, "The  adult  me  is 
here now" and consciously reject the presence of the 
child. Because the  overindulgence  does  not  happen, 
when  the  meal  is  fmished,  my  adult  stays  there. No 
parent comes in to blame me for what has been done. 
It does not take self-control or resisting anything; 
it just takes  being aware. When we  sit down, we say 
hello  to  our  adult  and  be  conscious. Just  as  we  sit 
down at the dinner table, we watch the kid come up 
in us. I have watched myself do this. "Oh, look at who 
is  there  at  the  table.  Oh, wow!  Look  at  the  pile  of 
mashed potatoes!  Look at the gravy!" Just watch peo­
ples' faces when they sit down at the table and we see 
who  is  'up' in  them. We  see  the  eyes  pop  open  and 
watch the pupils of the  eyes  get very large. If that is 
not a five-year-old kid, then I never saw one. 

We  may  see  a  serious-looking  businessman  walk 

350 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

into  a restaurant with his  briefcase. He  goes through 
the cafeteria line and then sits down. Now, watch his 
face as he puts his napkin in front of him. He picks up 
his  napkin-somebody else is  already there! There is 
the kid all ready to have a good time!  Of course, after 
the man gets up to leave, now we instantly see, "Oh, I 
ate too much." Now who is  there?  Look at the frown 
as  the man is berating himself as  he walks out of the 
restaurant. In his mind, he is counting all the calories. 
He  just  ate  3,850  calories  for  dinner, and  his  doctor 
told  him he is  supposed to  have  only 900  calories  a 
day. He figures  he cannot eat until next Tuesday now 
and wonders how is he going to survive. 

We can break out of this self-defeating pattern just 
by being aware. Make  a  little  sign for the refrigerator 
door that says,"Adults Only." Be conscious; be aware of 
who is there.We will fmd that the adult enjoys the eat­
ing very much, too, but just does not go crazy so easily. 
It is important to avoid  a  fluctuating blood sugar 
level  as  much  as  possible  when  first  initiating  this 
program because, in the unconscious mind, a  drop in 
blood sugar is often associated with hunger and hun­
gry feelings. For example, if we eat a hot fudge sundae 
on  an  empty  stomach,  the  blood  sugar  shoots  up, 
adrenaline and insulin pour out, and the blood sugar 
tends to drop rapidly. Behaviorally, in the past, this has 
been associated with feeling  hungry, but we  are  not 
actually  hungry. The  stomach  is  still  full.  We  have 
more calories in us than we need, but it is the rapid­
ity  and  the  degree  of the  drop  in  this  blood  sugar 
from where it was previously that triggers the sensa­
tion of hunger again. 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

351 

It is  much easier when initiating  this  program to 
stay  on  a  high-protein  diet  as  much  as  possible 
because then the blood sugar tends to stay relatively 
level. We  avoid those sudden drops that give the feel­
ing that we want to eat something right away, there­
fore making it a little easier on ourself. The point is to 
avoid  suffering  in  all  its  forms. We  do  not  want  to 
experience suffering in any kind of program because, 
otherwise, it is not going to work. Counting calories 
and depriVing ourself is setting up a form of suffering. 
What happens then is  unconscious-we get satisfied 
'and the  over-indulgence  sets up  guilt. Then we  diet, 
which is  sort of self-punitive, by going on bread and 
water like a prisoner for a certain period of time.After 
we  have  punished  ourself  sufficiently  for  all  the 
overindulgence  in  the  past, the guilt  disappears  and 
the  old  habitual  eating  pattern  returns. We  want  to 
eliminate  the  imbalance  of  extremes  of  overindul­
gence, feeling  guilty, going into a  self-punitive  bread­
and-water diet-first swinging  to  the  overeating  and 
overindulgence, and then swinging into the guilt and 
self-punitive deprivation. 

Deprivation  is  not  the  way  to  happiness,  nor  is 
overindulgence. It is preferable to use consciousness 
techniques to transcend them and be in the middle of 
the two so that we are  over and above the problem, 
with the adult there  to  take  over. This  makes it easy 
and enjoyable. It is  really delightful to realize that we 
have  just handled and transcended something in just 
a  matter  of minutes  that  has  plagued  us  our whole 
lifetime. 

The first day I tried thiS, I think I spent about forty­

352 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

five  minutes  sitting  down and  handling  those  sensa­
tions; the second day, maybe twenty minutes; the third 
day,  maybe  ten  minutes;  and  the  fourth  day,  maybe 
four minutes. Since that time, I do not think I have col­
lectively  spent  an  hour  using  the  technique  over 
many years. One can start a  stopwatch, sit down, use 
this technique, and hit the stopwatch again when the 
hunger feeling  is  gone. One probably would not col­
lect more than an hour over a ten-year period of time, 
so there certainly is not much effort needed or suffer­
ing to be experienced. 

No  will  power  is  involved;  willingness  is  being 
used instead because it is a positive, powerful energy 
at  level  310.  Using  will  power  means  resistance, 
which is a negative energy field with a weak power of 
only 125. Instead, we use willingness and acceptance, 
which lead to happiness that calibrates closer to 500. 
We  end up  being joyful  and feeling  great  about our­
selves. The  body becomes pleasing, and we  begin to 
experience it in a happy way. 

Another way to increase the rapidity of the effect 
of this is by watching our activities. Exercise is great, 
but how many mornings are we going to get up  and 
do calisthenics? No matter how attractive the person 
is on television, we are just going to do this a certain 
number of times, and by the  fourth  day,  the  enthusi­
asm  wears  off;  before  we know  it, we  are  back into 
the same old pattern. Exercise is wonderful. It is good 
for  that  sense  of  well-being,  but  weight-reduction 
folks  know the truth of that one. They have  a  dozen 
exercise machines in the garage. 

In  contrast,  the  relatively  effortless  system  just 

~----

LOSING  WEIGHT 

353 

described actually works so well that you may end up 
having  a  problem with  being  too  thin. That  is  what 
happened  with  me. The  technique  just  worked  so 
well that pretty soon the appetite and  hunger disap­
peared, along with all the cycles of eating, indulgence, 
and  feeling  guilty.  I  noticed  I  forgot  to eat  breakfast 
and lunch. I got busy with the activities of the day and 
totally forgot eating. 

Once in a  while it comes to  us in the  beginning, 
because it is  a  habit, that it is mealtime. Then we just 
sit down and let go of resisting that just as we do the 
sensation,  and  we  will  notice  that  the  ideas  that "I 
must eat breakfast," "I  must eat lunch;' or, "I  must eat 
dinner" are cultural conditions. They do not have any 
reality  to  them. It is  just as  easy to  not eat all  day.  (I 
have  actually  gone  days  without  eating  and  did  not 
even  notice  it.  One  time  I  went  from  Monday  to 
Thursday.  I  was  so  busy  with  activities,  and  on 
Thursday,  I  suddenly  realized, "I  don't  think  I  have 
eaten for  the last couple of days:' Sure enough, I  had 
not. Then the family began to complain that I was too 
thin, so then I had to consciously be aware that it was 
necessary to eat. I had to reprogram myself a little bit 
to go back into eating.The technique works extremely 
well and brings a  great deal of happiness. 

Another  consciousness  technique,  which  has  a 

general application, can be used as well. (All the tech­
niques  we  have  discussed  have  many  applications.) 
You  picture  the  kind  of body you want to  have  and 
the feeling you want to have about having this kind of 
body.Then remember sometime in your life when you 
were  feeling  joyful  and  pleased with yourself.  Next, 

354 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

picture  the  body  the  way  you  want  it  to  be  and 
reawaken  that  emotion  of  joy.  For  example,  if you 
want to be slim, picture yourself as slim and begin to 
love that picture of yourself, Love  that picture of the 
body and then let it go, knowing that you have set up 
a  program. You  have set up what is  going  to  happen 
in the future because the mind begins to move in that 
direction automatically. Just love that picture of your­
self.  lf you  like, you  can  put the  number  of pounds 
under it and picture  how you want to look, and  say, 
"You know, it's fantastic to be slim and active and feel 
good about the body. I love myself for that." Research 
studies confIrm that imaging techniques are effective. 
We want to stop identifying with the body. We  are 
not  the  body. We  have  a  body, so  how we  view  our 
relationship  with the  body is  important. We  are  that 
which has a body, just like we are that which has a car 
or  a  house  to  live  in. The  body  becomes  like  those 
things, like  a  pet, which is  a  great way to look  at it. 
"See, this is  my little pet, this is my bicycle, this is  my 
car, this is  my pet that carries me around."We can see 
that it is different from saying, "I  am that." If I say I am 
the body, then I am subject to what goes on with the 
body. If it gains weight, then it is 'me' who is fat, and I 
am the one at fault. It does not take too much in the 
way  of meditative  self-awareness  to  realize  that  we 
are that which experiences the body, but we are not 
the body. 

At  the  beginning, we  said  that  the  body  cannot 
experience itself; it can only be experienced in mind. 
Mind can only be experienced by consciousness, and 
consciousness itself can  only be experienced by the 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

355 

field called 'awareness', so we are that which is aware 
of the body, as well as that which is beyond the body. 
Our reality is  one thing, and the body is  another that 
reflects  what  we  hold  in  consciousness. Therefore, 
the  problem  is  not  the  body  at  all;  the  problem  is 
what we hold in consciousness. 

The  task  is  really  to  change  the  vibrational  pat­
terns  within  consciousness.  This  body  is  going  to 
automatically do what it is  told to do. It caimot think 
because  it  has  no  mind. That which  we  are  has  the 
mind, and the body follows what the mind tells it to do. 
With this  imagining  technique, the way in which 
we  hold  our relationship  to  the  body  as  pleasurable 
releases its dominance.As we keep letting go and fol­
lowing  these  techniques,  the  body  seems  to  get 
lighter.The body, having nothing to do with weight, is 
experienced  as  progressively  weightless.  After  a 
while, as  we move up the scale of consciousness, we 
are hardly aware that the body even exists. 

In looking at the scale of consciousness differently, 
we  can  see  how  we  originate  and  perpetuate  the 
weight problem by holding it in the form of destruc­
tive  emotional  patterns. It is  generally  thought  that 
these  negative  feelings  are  the 'cause' of the  weight 
problem, but if we look into it, we see this is really not 
so. We  can  see  that  these  are  the  reactions  to  the 
weight problem, and sometimes they are the corollary 
or the parallel. 

How have  we  been holding  the  weight problem 
up  to  this  point?  Most  of us  have  been down  at the 
bottom  of the  scale  in  the  area  called  Guilt, with  a 
very weak energy field  of 30. If we try to handle our 

356 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

weight  problem  or  any  problem, such as  alcohol  or 
relationship, from the level of Guilt, we can see how 
much  energy we  have  to  work with. We  have  thirty 
dollars compared to Love, which is five  hundred dol­
lars.  Thirty  dollars  is  not  going  to  buy  us  much 
progress in anything. Not only that, the energy field is 
negative, meaning we are going to feel negative about 
the whole thing, along with self-hatred.The process is 
actually destructive. 

People have actually committed suicide over their 
weight problem and  self-indulgence. Even  if they do 
not  handle 
it  from  Guilt,  they  move  up· to 
Hopelessness. This  state  at  the  energy field  of 50  is 
also accompanied by despair. This means, "My case is 
hopeless.  I  have  tried  all  the  diets;  I  have  tried  the 
milk farms. I have lost the energy with which to even 
address  this  problem any  more. I'm the victim  of it, 
and I just surrender to it and give  up." Therefore, this 
level is "I  am hopeless." 

The next one above it is Grief. This is  the level of 
depression and regret about the problem, along with 
feeling  despondent and dispirited. There  may be the 
fear of this problem and its  consequences. These are 
all  negative  feelings,  such  as  "I'm  going  to  die  of a 
heart  attack. This  excess weight is  going  to kill  me." 
This  level  is  full  of worry,  anxiety,  and  panic. "It  is 
going to  destroy my relationships and my future." Of 
course, one's self-esteem is deflated, so people with a 
weight  problem  often  withdraw  socially. They  com­
pensate  in other ways  because  they feel  inadequate 
due to this energy field. They really are not inadequate 
people at all. They are just holding that about the sit­

LOSING  WEIGHT 

357

uation, and the negativity of it affects their emotions. 
We  have  already  discussed  Desire  at  calibration 
level  125, which includes  desiring, wanting, craving, 
and the entrapment behind all this. 

The next field  upwards is that of Anger. We  know 
the person is angry about their weight problem. They 
resent  it  and  are  filled  with  grievances  about  it. 
Although energy level 150 is more effective, they may 
be more successful in utiliZing anger rather than guilt 
or hopelessness. If one  is  angry enough about  their 
weight  problem, they can move  up  to  Pride at level 
175.That offers a lot more energy. Through Pride, one 
can choose  to  adopt a  successful program to follow 
and then move up to Courage. 

Courage provides some tools that really work, and 
at that level, there is the courage to try them.At 200, 
there  is  a  lot  of  power  compared  to  30  or  50.  It 
enables  us  to  face,  cope,  and  handle,  resulting  in 
becoming empowered. The truth is  that we have not 
known how to  handle  it  up  to  this  point. If we had 
known how, we would have done it. 

As we use these letting-go techniques, we become 
detached  from  the  whole  problem.  If the  weight 
stays, it stays, and if it does not, it does not make any 
difference; therefore, we feel good and then move up 
to the level of Willingness. 

Willingness at 310 has a lot of energy when com­
pared to Guilt or Grief. We can see how much power 
we have  now  that we  are  in  agreement  and  aligned 
with this technique. Our intention is that we are finally . 
going to  handle it, and we can accept  that it  can be 
handled.We start feeling that weare an adequate person 

358 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

and  start  becoming  confident.  A  transformation  is 
now occurring because we realize that the power to 
handle  this  is  within  ourselves, and we  start moving 
up into a lovingness. There is  the desire to really love 
ourself  and  the  body  now  that  we  do  not  identify 
with it as  'me'; this  body is  not 'me'. If I lose  my left 
leg, I am still 'me'. If I then lose my right leg, I am still 
'me'. If I imagine losing my left or right arm, I will still 
be 'me'. If I lose both ears, I will still be 'me'. We fmally 
realize  that  only  the  'me' is  me, and  we  are  not  the 
body. Whether  it weighs  200  pounds  or 85  pounds, 
that which we actually are is of a different quality and 
essence. Therefore, we  must  learn  to  love  that  body 
now, to begin to really value it and see that it is just an 
enjoyable little puppet. 

The way to relate to the body is  to see that it is a 
happy  puppet  that  just  goes  about  its  way.  At  this 
level, we can start getting playful with it and experi­
ence a sort of joyfulness.As it bounces around, we are 
just sort of dimly  aware  of it because we are  experi­
encing our existence from a position ofAllness. Once 
we  become  conscious  about  where  experience 
seems to be actually happening, we realize that 'expe­
riencing'  is  a  nonlocal,  diffuse,  subjective  condition. 
We  begin to identify with everywhereness instead of 
stomachness, bulginess, or ulcerness-all those local­
ized  things-and instead realize  that what 'I  am' is  a 
conscious being. 

Consciousness is everywhere, so we then begin to 
experience existence as ~eing  nonspatial. Within this 
everywhereness  and  Allness,  this  happy  puppet 
bounces  around,  spontaneously  doing  what  it  does 

!

LOSING  WEIGHT 

359 

and having a good time doing it. Even if we are delib­
erate,  we  are  only  spontaneously  being  deliberate. 
With observation, it will be discovered that all action or 
even  thinking  is  actually  spontaneously  autonomous. 
(ConfIrmed by the neuroscience research of B. Libet, et 
at.)  By  valuing  our existence, we  come  to  realize  its 
intrinsic  greatness, bigness, and  the  joy  of aliveness, 
and we  see  the  body  as  a  contributor to  that  fulfill­
ment of something enjoyable. The body is something 
to have fun with, experiment with, and play with. 

Within  a  couple  of  days,  once  we  release  this 
appetite!hunger cycle, the  rest of it is  automatic. We 
know we do not have to do another thing. If we want 
to throw in some common sense and have a diet Coke 
instead of a  regular Coke to save  a hundred calories, 
well, that is common sense. That is  up to us, which is 
different from being at the effect of it.That is different 
from  being  run  by  the  guilt  of it  because  now  we 
have a choice. 

Another trick that works is  to never allow ourself 
to go over a certain number of pounds. If we choose 
132,  that  means  that  if by  accident  we  weigh  134, 
then we go  back to this  technique  again  and get off 
that  cycle  because  those  old  patterns  can  tend  to 
recur. However, they are  then easy to let go of if they 
do. We  merely use  the  technique  once  or twice. The 
first  time  we feel  hungry, we  sit down  and  skip  the 
eating until the hunger disappears.Then we go out to 
the refrigerator if we want to, and remember to have 
our adult there. We may put a note inside the refriger­
ator to see when we open the  door, or maybe  a  pic­
ture of ourself as an adult. This helps us to realize that 

360 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

we have a  choice about whose arm is  going to reach 
into  the  refrigerator. We  know  to  keep  the  kid  out 
because that kid is going to help himself or herself to 
whatever is in the refrigerator and not let the adult be 
there.As a result, it all becomes a very enjoyable expe­
rience, one in which we truly begin to love ourself. 
The basis of all  the self-healing techniques is  pri­
marily  to  learn  ways  of  loving  ourself,  to  begin  to 
value ourself and love that which we are in truth.That 
which we really are then looks at our little body and 
begins to get a  kick out of it. It says, "Gee, I'm having 
a  good time with you. You  are  a  fun thing." We  begin 
to see that it really almost runs on automatic by itself. 
We will see that the ego has played a trick on us, too. 
We think that we make a decision and the body then 
follows  through.  Actually,  it  is  doing  it  by  itself 
because it is  on automatic. Once we have released it 
from  a  negative  pattern,  the  body  will  just  handle 
itself very well. 

In  scientific  experiments  with young  children, if 
they are  allowed to  spontaneously select their diets, 
they  will  automatically  select  a  balanced  diet.  One 
begins to experience a return of faith in nature, allow­
ing  the  body now to  sort  of be  itself. The  nature  of 
that which is  natural within the  body will  automati­
cally handle its nutritional needs.When"we get off the 
social programming, that which is  automatically self­
healing and healthy within the body takes control. It 
looks after itself, choosing what it needs and wants to 
eat, and it does so extremely well. 

It could be said that it is wise to have faith in the 
Divinity within Nature itself, in the body's being part 

LOSING  WEIGHT 

361 

of the  beautiful  Nature  of this  planet. It has  its  own 
inner wisdom. When we  remove  the  artificial  condi­
tioning of our society, the body's innate inner wisdom 
comes forth  and  expresses  itself in  a  sense  of alive­
ness, joyfulness, lightness, and in the  capacity to feel 
good  at  all  times, and  its  weight  handles  itself auto­
matically. 

To  achieve  this, all  that is  necessary is  just a  few 
minutes of time, with many years of joyful rewards as 
a  result. Have  a  good time  with the body. Love  it, be 
good to it, and give it all the love and attention that it 
needs. Realize  that it belongs to you but is  not what 
you are. It is a lovely possession, so enjoy it while you 
have it. 

"What if I  do  all  the  above  and  it  doesn't work? 
What  if I  am  still  overweight  despite  everything?" If 
that is  the situation, then it is  time to shift priorities. 
Maybe  there  is  a  genetic  pattern that  is  familial  and 
even multigenerational.Weight is actually a vanity any­
way, is it not, unless it is life threatening. It is better to 
focus  on  being  a  loving  and  valuable  person. Many 
great  people  who  changed  history  were  probably 
genetically heavy, such as Winston  Churchill, genera­
.tions  of  opera  stars, William  Jennings  Bryan, Teddy 
Roosevelt, and the European monarchs and aristocracy, 
to name a few. It is  better to be hefty and happy and 
just dismiss  the whole  issue  than to  obsess about it. 
We  do not take the body with us when we leave the 
planet, and aesthetics do not have a priority in heaven. 

CHAPTER  12 

Depression 

The depression and despondency that plague mankind 
have  been  prevalent  since  ancient  biblical  days.  It 
currently  constitutes  what  is  being  called  a  minor 
epidemic  in the  form  of a  rising  suicide  rate  among 
young  people,  especially  adolescents.  Depression 
affects all our lives. Few of us have managed to live on 
this planet for any great length of time without experi­
encing  depression.  It may  be  minor,  in  the  form  of 
regret, or major, in the forms of mourning, loss of loved 
ones, or loss  of the things we have valued in our lives 
because  of their meaning  to  us. We  will view depres­
sion  from  the  perspective  of consciousness  and  also 
cover the role  of biochemistry and antidepressants. Is 
the biochemistry the cause or the effect of depression? 
At  this point, a review of the relationship between 
body, mind, and spirit is  appropriate  because we will 
be  talking  about the  treatment and  understanding  of 
depression on all three levels. We need to review again 
that  the  body  has  no way  of experiencing  itself. The 
body cannot experience its  own bodyness nor can it 
experience  its  own  sensations. The  body  is  experi­
enced in mind, and mind also  has  no real capacity to 
experience itself. All  memories, thoughts, feelings, fan­
tasies  of the future, and daydreams  are registered and 
experienced in a field that is larger and more diffuse, a 
field of energy that we call consciousness. It has to be 
experienced by something greater than mind, which is 
called awareness.Awareness allows us to know what is 
going on within consciousness (they are concordant). 
Consciousness allows us to know what is going on 

363 

364 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

in mind, and mind allows us to know what is going on 
in  our feelings  and  emotions  as  well  as  in  the  sensa­
tions from  the body. Therefore, all these processes are 
going  on within consciousness  itself. It is  also  impor­
tant to  address  issues  on the  Wghest  level  where  the 
most power exists. Therefore, a  change in the field  of 
consciousness within mind brings about an alteration 
within the body. 

When talking about depression, the brain, its hor­
mones, neurotransmitters, and physiology are of great 
interest.  What  are  the  real  causes  of  depression? 
Again,  we  will  refer  to  the  Map  of  Consciousness, 
wWch shows the levels of consciousness from zero all 
the way up to  the  highest calibrated  levels  of joyful 
states, and then even beyond, up to the state of con­
sciousness the world calls Enlightenment. On the Map 
we see that within those levels the energy fields have 
a  direction  indicated  by  the  arrows,  which  shows 
whether we experience something as a positive asset 
in  our lives  or as  a  negative, deleterious  event. Near 
the middle of the Map is  the level of Courage, which 
is the calibrated energy field of 200, the level ofTruth. 
Below 200, the energies are negative, and above 200, 
the energy field  swings  upward, indicating a  life-sup­
portive energy field. 

We  are  going  to  review  the  human  experiences, 
starting at the bottom of the Map, called Guilt,Apathy, 
and Grief.These fields express themselves in emotions, 
such  as  self-hatred,  self-recrimination,  hopelessness, 
despair, and despondency. All are accompanied by feel­
ings of regret, loss, and depression. 

In these energy fields of depression, our view of the 

DEPRESSION 

365 

world is that of a sad and hopeless place of sin and suf­
fering. Our view of God, the God of a world like that, 
would be of one who ignores us, who is unfeeling and 
uncaring,  and  from  whom  we  are  separated.  Out  of 
guiltiness,  worthlessness,  and  sinfulness,  God  can  be 
imagined to have negative  (anthropomorphic) human 
attributes. 

When looking at the process going on in conscious­
ness  in  the  lower  energy  fields,  at  the  bottom  level 
(Shame) is a state described as deflated.The one above 
(Guilt)  is  called  dispirited,  which  does  not  have  the 
energy of life  or the desire to live. In the Apathy state, 
the  process  going  on  in  consciousness  is  the  loss  of 
energy. Due to the loss of the life energy within, a per­
son  no  longer attracts  energy from  the  universe. The 
process  is  one  of being  de-energized, which leads  to 
the self-hatred of destruction and the lower states that 
precede  death. From  this,  there  is  often  a  pattern  of 
passive suicide. 

We  are going to look at active  and passive suicide. 
What do they arise  from?  How can they be handled? 
What do they really mean? In what way can we create 
an understanding of this whole field of depression, this 
plague  of  mankind?  How  can  we  benefit  from  an 
understanding of the nature of consciousness itself? 

All  the  energy  fields  below  the  level  of Courage 
have  a  negative  direction,  and  seldom  does  one  of 
these  emotions  occur  singly.  Generally,  one  negative 
emotion tends to pull in others as well to some degree. 
In depression, there are also feelings of self-blame, self­
hatred, and worthlessness.These feelings are associated 
with the  level  of hopelessness  and despair. There  are 

366 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

regrets  about the past and fears  about the future, and 
very often there are also guilt and anger. Frequently it 
is said that depression is anger turned inward. 

Traditional  psychotherapy  recommends  trying  to 
energize  and  bring  up  the  anger  accompanying  the 
depression,  and  then  determine  the  source  of  the 
anger. We will discover that both anger and depression 
are  the  result  of  the  same  error-having  made  the 
same  mistake within the mind, and within conscious­
ness  itself. What is  the error that will  be found  when 
looking at the anger, the fear, the grief, the apathy, or the 
guilt? We will fmd that the person has placed their sur­
vival on something outside themselves. 

All  the negative energy fields  are based on placing 
the  source of our happiness externally. This  results  in 
being vulnerable and also being the potential, hopeless 
victim. Being  the victim  means  perceiving  a  cause  as 
being  outside  ourself. Therefore,  the  vulnerability  to 
depression is present as long as we think the source of 
our happiness is something outside ourselves. 

The common frailty of human consciousness is  to 

make happiness dependent upon externals, such as say­
ing, "Well, when I get that degree, then I'll  be successful 
and happy," or, "When I learn that foreign language; or 
get to move into that apartment; or get that fur coat or 
new car; or when I get that advanced college degree; or 
when I  get that relationship; or, if I  could just change 
that  person out there; if I  could get my aunt  to  stop 
drinking; if our company would only come out of the 
red and go into the black, then I will be successful." It 
is  always 'out there'. Placing the  source  of our happi­
ness  outside  ourself is  putting  us  in  the  position  of 

DEPRESSION 

367 

being  vulnerable  to  depression,  anxiety,  fear,  and  a 
potential loss. It is only by owning ourself as the source 
of happiness, as  the experience of our existence, inde­
pendent  and  beyond  that  which  happens  within  the 
world, that we become immune to depressive episodes. 
Each time we look at the Map  of Consciousness, it 
is from a different perspective with a different emphasis. 
It alters our understanding of the nature of human con­
sciousness as  we approach it from  a  different context 
with a broader understanding. The levels of conscious­
ness have either a positive or a negative direction, with 
a  crucial  intersection  in  the  middle  at  the  level  of 
Courage, which is  crossed over by telling the truth. In 
this case, the telling of the truth is  that "My happiness 
does  not  depend  on  anything  outside  of  me.  I,  of 
myself,  am  the  source  of  my  happiness  by  my  own 
inner decisions, integrity, intentions, and by the way I 
see myself and my relationships with the events of life." 
At the bottom of the Map is maximum victimhood 
in  which the  total  source  of our happiness  has  been 
placed  outside  ourself. The  loss  of that  brings  about 
self-contempt and self-hatred. There is  nothing within 
the self now to love because that which was loved was 
seen as  something outside ourself. 

At the stage ofApathy, which we know as hopeless­

ness  and  despair,  there  is  a  state  of no  energy,  so  a 
person in that state  is  in  a  severe clinical depression. 
The person is  usually unresponsive  and may sit in a 
chair,  staring  blankly  out  the  window. They  are  fre­
quently  unresponsive  to  any  communication  and  are 
unable to talk.Very often they stop eating and may not 
be able to sleep or function in the world.These are the 

368 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

severe forms of depression, which also have a biochem­
ical basis in the brain that leads to seeing life as sad, the 
future as hopeless, and themselves as empty and worth­
less. The  concept of the  God of that kind  of world is 
one  who  ignores  and  does  not  care  for  them. It  is  a 
state of total unlovingness and feeling unloved. 

Our  clinical  experience  indicates  that  the  three 
lower states  of hopelessness  and  helplessness, which 
we collectively call despondence and depression, arise 
as  a  consequence  of the  failure  to  have  handled  the 
energy field  above it, which is  called Fear. The person 
is  not facing  the  underlying  fear  because  the  depres­
sion arises from the loss of meaning. It is not the thing 
outside of them that the person has placed their happi­
ness on that is the difficulty, but the meaning they have 
attached to it. It is not the college degree but the mean­
ing  of that  degree.  It  is  not  the  relationship  but  the 
meaning  of the  relationship. It  is  not  the  position  or 
title of president of the company, or the financial  suc­
cess, or haVing  the right address, but their importance 
and value.What we project onto a thing, or the way we 
hold it, depends on the meaning we give to it. In and of 
itself, it has no meaning; it merely is. 

Meaning is a mental construction that we have pro­
jected out, thereby assigning  value  to  something. The 
value  arises  out of our own mentaVemotional values 
that are being projected onto something outside of us. 
This  results  in  seeing  ourself  as  separated  from· the 
source  of happiness. There  is  'me', and  then  there  is 
that  'outside  of self'  from  which  we  feel  separated. 
There is the fantasy that if we could reunite with that, 
have that, control that, then that would heal the inner 

DEPRESSION 

369 

feeling  of lack  and  separation. To  feel  separated from 
that which we want is to unconsciously feel separated 
from God.The view of God in these depressed states is 
one of being totally separated from  the source of our 
happiness. 

The way to get out of a depression is to look at the 
underlying  fear. What  is  the  fear?  We  have  used  the 
actual clinical example of the woman who received a 
telegram  from  the  Department  of Defense  that  her 
son was killed in action. She is rocking back and forth 
in  her  chair  and  staring  out  the  window.  Several 
weeks later a telegram arrived stating there had been 
an error, they regretted the error, and that the son was 
still alive. When the family told her this, she just kept 
on  rocking  back  and forth,  staring  out  the  window. 
"Mother, mother," they said  as they shook her, "didn't 
you hear? Joey is not dead. He is alive and fine. He is in 
an R &  R camp in Vietnam." However, she just kept on 
rocking. 

Something  had  happened. The  energy  field,  the 
state she had obviously been holding, was that of her 
son  and her relationship  to  him as  a  major source of 
happiness. Being a widow, that relationship was prime 
in her life. Now something had happened; the energy 
of the field  had  brought  about  a  change  in the  brain 
chemistry. We can see that in this instance, the shift in 
the brain chemistry is a  consequence. Due to the loss 
of meaning in her life, the energy field then expressed 
itself on the level of brain chemistry. 

All  things  are  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual. 
Spiritually, the meaning here was  the separation from 
God;  emotionally,  it  was  the  significance  of this  rela­

370 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

tionship;  and  on  the  physical  level,  it  was  the  brain 
chemistry. There was  a  shift  and a  loss  of neurotrans­
mitters. The brain was in a depressive condition.There 
was a depression of essential neurotransmitters in cer­
tain areas of the brain that accompanied the condition. 
Therefore, it is possible to ameliorate the expression of 
this  symptom on the physical level by the use of anti­
depressants. In treating all these conditions, we find  it 
most  efficacious  to  treat  all  levels  simultaneously. We 
address  the person in a dialogue where they begin to 
examine  what  they  had  placed  meaning  and  signifi­
cance  on and how they had filled  the internal empti­
ness of their life with things from the outside to give it 
value. This  process  thereby  created  the  vulnerability. 
We  have to look at how it is  held psychologically and, 
at the same time, treat it on the physical level. 

The  antidepressants available  these days  are very 
effective. Generally it is  safe  to. treat the  depression 
of the  majority  of patients  pharmacologically  with 
antidepressants as long as there is close clinical super­
vision,  especially  in  children  and  adolescents. 
Pharmacologically, they take the person from the bot­
tom of the Map  and lift them up to  a  higher level so 
they are then able to respond to psychotherapy or spir­
itual counseling to try to  alleviate· the conditions that 
brought  about  the  vulnerability.  The  risks  of  psy­
chopharmacology have to be weighed against the risk 
of  suicide,  especially  when  an  apathetic  depression 
becomes agitated (Hawkins, 2005). 

Facing  the  fear  that  underlies  the  depression 
relieves the depression.The fear is that one has lost the 
meaning of life. They have lost that which is  of value, 

DEPRESSION 

371 

and feel it will never be replaced. Hopelessness means 
that the expectation of the future  is  zero. There is  no 
hope  that  a  context  of meaning  and significance  will 
be  recreated  that  will  reenergize  and  give  one's  life 
meaning again. This, of course, is  an illusion, but at the 
time, the  hopelessness  is  based  on the  perception  of 
oneself and one's relationship to life. 

When treating  a  depressed person, we look to see 
what the loss is, for example, the loss of a job, the loss 
of vitality, the loss of youth, or the loss of opportunity. 
People become depressed at middle age and see life as 
having  passed  them  by,  and  now  feel  they  have  lost 
their opportunity. The loss of looks for a  person, such 
as a middle-aged woman for whom her appearance has 
been very important in her life, affects her sense of self­
value  and her way of relating  to  the world. If she has 
based her power in the world on her looks, then that 
loss is  a  great  danger to her and not just a  superficial 
thing, such as  vanity. It is  far  more  than  that; it  is  her 
whole sense of self-worth and value. Beauty to her has 
become valuable and makes her a worthwhile person. 
We discover the underlying fear and get the person 
to be willing to look at the fear. Instead of depression, 
the person has to handle fear instead because fear has 
to do with the future. "How am I going to live without 
what has given my life  significance?"This can be seen 
in the addictions, for example. One might say that any­
body who gets depressed has been addicted to placing 
their survival on something outside themselves. 

In the  addictions, if we  threaten to  take  away the 
drug  upon which  the  person  has  been  placing  their 
survival and happiness, we see terror-not just fear, but 

372 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

absolute terror.The conviction within the addict is that 
it  will  be  impossible  to  live· in  this  world  without 
access to that substance, so we have the person look at 
the fear  and then utilize the techniques clinically that 
we have found to handle fear; next, we create the will­
ingness  to  be with it-to stop  labeling it and to  stop 
the thoughts. They focus  instead on the exact experi­
ence of what is  coming up as  they look at that which 
. is feared within mind. The person looks at it and then 
goes  into  the  radical  truth  of what  is  literally  being 
experienced within  them. They n~ed  to be willing to 
surrender to that and let go of resisting the fear.As this 
happens, the sensations run through the body. 

I  ask  the  person, "What  are  you  experiencing  in 
your  body?" They  report, "My  mouth  is  so  dry,  I  can 
hardly talk. My heart feels like it is fluttering. My stom­
ach  feels  like  it  is  turning  over.  I  feel  cramps  in  my 
abdomen. My knees are so weak, I can hardly stand up." 
Then we start with the feelings, one by one.We say, 
"All  right, tingling in your legs  and your knees. Could 
you let go of resisting that? Could you just let yourself 
experience  that  and  be  with  that?  Stop  re~isting  it. 
Don't call it fear. Just sense what you are sensing.What 
are you sensing?" 

The reply is, "I'm sensing a tingling in my legs." 
Then I ask, "Can you handle a tingling in your legs? 
You have handled headaches, major surgery, and deaths 
in the family. I'm certain you can handle the tingling in 
your legs."The person will say they can handle that. 

Next  I  say, "Let  go  of resisting  the  tingling  in  the 
legs.  Now,  how  about  the  cramps  in  the  abdomen? 
Could you let go of resisting that?  Could you stop call­

DEPRESSION 

373 

ing  them  'cramps'?  Could  you  just  experience  what 
you are experiencing and let go of resisting that? Right. 
Let's  go  up  higher. What  about  the  flip-flops  in  the 
stomach? Can you handle that?" 
"Yes, I can handle that:' 
"Could  you  just  handle  the  experience  and  stop 
calling  it  flip-flops  in  your  stomach?  How  about  the 
beating in your pulse? Could you let go in your mind of 
resisting that? Just let your pulse beat away if it wants 
to. How about the dry mouth?" 

We get the person to realize, "Yes, I can handle that. 

I can handle the experience of that, but I  cannot han­
dle the fearful thoughts."And we agree that nobody can 
handle fearful thoughts. 

There is  no such thing as 'haVing' fearful thoughts. 
Fearful  thoughts  create themselves  by the thousands, 
and as we handle one bank of fearful thoughts, a whole 
new bank arises. "I'll be late for the plane. I won't get 
on  the  plane.  I'm  afraid  of  the  plane.  Something  is 
going to happen to the plane. I  might go to the bath­
room." The  mind  will  just  create  an  endless  series  of 
fears. What it can handle is  the dry mouth and the tin­
gling in the legs, and then the willingness  to face  the 
underlying fear. 

The  ftrst  thing  that  benefits  the  person  is  relief 
from depression.They say, "Oh, I see I'm not depressed. 
I  see  that I  was  terrified  of the future  and  that  I  will 
never find happiness without what I wished for, longed 
for, and desired. I was convinced that I had to have that 
in order to survive and be happy:' 

People who have been convinced of that and were 
on sizable doses of alcohol or drugs have been as close 

374 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

to actually needing something to survive as anybody on 
the  planet  could  be. Yet,  after  they gave  that  up  and 
faced  the fear of it all, they found that life  was joyful, 
complete, full, and enjoyable for the first  time in their 
lives. We  know that fear is  based on an illusion; there­
fore, we have the courage to take the patient with us to 
look at the fear, just like we take the child by the hand 
to lead them. 

When I was a child, somebody on the block told me 
about bogeymen. My mother had ridiculed bogeymen, 
ghosts, and similar things but somehow, because of that 
older kid's convincingness (and he acted like he knew 
what he was talking about), I  became afraid of bogey­
men.  My  mother  took  me  by  the  hand  and  led  me 
down  into  the  dark  basement  with  flashlights  and 
looked all over for bogeymen. None were found there, 
or in the closets, or behind the  curtains, or anywhere 
else in the house or attic. 

It is helpful to have someone with us when looking 
at the fear because it is  our unconscious child that is 
frightened.  Our inner  child  does  not  understand  the 
nature of real life in this world, so it comes up and says, 
"Gee, without that, I won't be able to survive." 

As  we said before, depression is often aligned with 
anger  turned within. What  about  that  anger? What  is 
the  basis  of the  anger?  We  will  use  the  example  of 
somebody  who  bases  survival  on  something  outside 
himself,  such as  an  addict. When we  threaten  to  take 
away his bottle or supply or flush his drugs down the 
toilet, he  goes  into  a  rage.  Now  it is  very clear to  us 
what the source of the anger is, is it not? The source of 
the anger is  exactly the same fantasy as  the source of 

DEPRESSION 

375 

happiness being something outside of him and which 
has  been placed on  some  external  object-a person, 
place, or thing.To place the source of our happiness on 
something  outside  ourself  creates  a  negative  energy 
field  because  it  is  basically a  lie. The source  of happi­
ness is not something that is outside ourself at all. 

Only when we own that we are the source of our 

happiness does the energy field go in a positive direc­
tion. We  can  move  a  person  out  of  depression  and 
despondency, get  them  to  face  the  fear,  get  them  to 
desire something better for themselves, and turn their 
anger into anger at being the victim instead of being at 
the loss of an object. 

There are usually endless rationalizations and expla­
nations to try to make their anger sound justified."They 
promised me this.They signed a contract.They sent me 
a  check  that  wasn't  any  good." The  source  of that  is 
always outside of oneself, and the explanation, details, 
and events are only justifications for the anger. 

We can use this anger by turning it into anger at the 
vulnerability. One can say, "Now it is time to be angry at 
the  real  cause, which  is  that  I  was  brought  up  in  a 
world  that taught  me  to think this  way.  I  was taught 
that this is the right way to think."That is what we need 
to be angry about-that we were taught how to think 
in a  way that set us up as  potential victims-to think 
that  something  or  someone  outside  ourself  is  the 
source of happiness.The usual projected fantasy is that 
'success'is the source of happiness, is  it not? Will suc­
cess bring us happiness? 

I  used to live  on the East  Coast near a  community 
of millionaires, and despite their affluence, occasionally 

376 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

someone committed suicide or took a  drug overdose. 
They were not at all immune to the human vulnerabil­
ities. Therefore, worldly success (e.g., celebrity status) 
does not bring immunity.What we need to be angry at 
is what caused us to sell  ourselves out and then learn 
how we do it. Then we can take pride in the fact  that 
we are willing to look at this now and move up to the 
level of Courage to tell the truth about it. The truth is 
that something within our consciousness set us up to 
be vulnerable. 

If we start to take responsibility and say, "The way I 

was looking at this set me up for this depression, frus­
tration, and anger. It set me up for the letdown and this 
disappointment." The  courage  to  look  at  that  and  be 
willing to tell the truth about it now changes the way 
we feel about the whole subject.We can now move up 
to a situation where we can say to ourselves, "Well, it's 
okay. It's okay if that is  how people are taught in this 
world, and I grew up in this world. I guess I learned the 
same as  everybody else, but I'm willing to look at it in 
a different way now."We then move up to a willingness 
to  look  at  it  and  say, "Yes,  I  agree  to  look  at  this.  My 
intention is up, and I at least see the subject as promis­
ing and hopeful.The God of a friendly world is promis­
ing and hopeful. In other words, there is  going to be a 
benefit to me, not only in this particular situation, but 
there  is  also  going to  be a  benefit to  me  as  a  human 
being that will last my lifetime, because if I solve  this 
one, I have solved it for all time within myself." 

The willingness to look at that and accept what is 
discovered results in a certain confidence that there is 
a process going on within, and that this depression has 

DEPRESSION 

377 

arisen  to  bring  something  to  one's  attention. It is  as 
though  it  is  saying, "Something  is  out;  something  is 
wrong within my mind, within my consciousness, and 
within  my  spiritual  position,"  because  that  is  what 
pain means. Pain means, "Please look at me; something 
is  out." 

We can treat depression pharmacologically and get 
the person out of it temporarily, but if the person has 
not changed in their way of being in the world, in the 
way they are holding who they are and how they relate 
to the world and the universe, or in their expectations, 
their  vulnerability  remains  the  same. We  know  that 
many people who are treated with just antidepressants 
will recover from  the  current  episode. We  also  know 
that some people are prone to relapses due to geneti­
cally  determined  faulty  brain  chemistry,  and  others 
have  additional  episodes  unless  their  whole  context 
has changed. Without an understanding of the nature 
of consciousness itself, the vulnerability remains, and 
the person who has depressions of psychological ori­
gin is  subject to repeated bouts of depression within 
their lifetime. 

In looking  at this in a  holistic  way, from  the view­
point of body, mind, and spirit, we want to address the 
basic understanding to bring about an immunity froin 
further  episodes  of  this  debilitating  experience  of 
depression.Acceptance means seeing what the internal 
setup  is  without  blaming  oneself  or  getting  into  a 
'make wrong' scenario.There is nothing wrong with it; 
it just does not work. We have been trained and set up 
in  our  world  to  think  that  way  by  our  parents  who 
were also  set up to think that way. They just passed it 

378 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

down to us. It has been going on since ancient biblical 
times,  where  there  are  descriptions  of  very  severe 
depression, so it arises in the inherited collective con­
sciousness,  which  contains  the  same  program-that 
somehow happiness  and  the  source  of it  are  outside 
ourself. 

As we move up to level 310, with the willingness to 
tell the truth and to look at this, we can see the power 
of the field then goes up to the level of Acceptance at 
350. Here the energy field  is  positive  instead of nega­
tive because above-the level of Courage, the person has 
stopped projecting the source of their happiness out­
side  themselves.  They  have  begun  to  re-own  their 
power. At the level of Courage, there is the willingness 
to  tell  the  truth, face  the  situation, cope  with it,  and 
handle it. 

By  the  time  we  move  up  to  the  energy. level  of 
Acceptance,  we  see  a  person  who  is  confident  and 
easygoing, which comes from the awareness that one is 
the source of one's happiness. It means that the person 
has realized in their emotional, psychological, and spir­
itual growth that they are the cause of the happiness in 
their life. If we were to put such a person on a  desert 
island  somewhere  in the  South Pacific,  sail  away,  and 
return a year later, he would have a coconut factory, he 
would  be  making  flutes  out of bamboo, the  children 
would  be  learning  songs,  and  he  would  be  teaching 
French to  the  natives. He  would have  found  a  native 
girl, built  a  tree  house, and  re-created  for  himself the 
world around him as an expression of being the source 
of his own happiness. 

The anger was based on placing the source of hap­

DEPRESSION 

379 

piness outside of oneself. On a deeper level, the anger 
is that of having sold oneself out and having been sold 
out by being given  this  program to  operate with  and 
then  finding  out  that  it  does  not  work.  One  has  to 
accept that it  does  not work,be willing  to look  at  it, 
change, and say,"Okay." It only takes a matter of seconds 
to find a position from which it will work. 

How long does it take to come out of depression? 
It  only takes  as  long as  it  takes to  become willing  to 
look at the truth of what has happened.The capacity is 
within ourself to accept what has happened, to realize 
that we are the source of our own happiness, and to be 
unwilling to give it out to the world any more. The re­
owning of that power suddenly results in a state of con­
fidence. It no longer matters what happens 'out there'. 
The  realization  of that  truth  allows  us  to  experience 
ourself now  in  a  far  more  whole  and  complete  way 
instead  of from  lack  or vulnerability. There  is  just  the 
realization that we are the source and have the power 
to  create. The  self  projected  the  meaning  onto  this; 
therefore,  they  say  that  one  man's  meat  is  another 
man's  poison. The  same  event  that  would  make  one 
person happy would depress another. 

I  have watched people resist coming into money, 
for  example, because  it  was  not within  their value 
system. At  the  time  they  valued  not  having  money; 
therefore,  it  would  be  a  problem  if they  won  the 
lottery. Thus, winning might make  one  person joyful 
and fill  the other one with guilt. Why? The difference 
is meaning. 

Who  or what  created  the  meaning  that  gave  this 
thing  outside  ourself the  power and  significance? We 

380 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

are the creator of the meaning and the one who chooses 
what meaning to give to something.Therefore, we have 
to look at the way in which we have bought into social 
consciousness.We  have to look at the values by which 
we  have  unwittingly  allowed  ourselves  to  be  pro­
grnmmed and say to  ourselves, "Do  I  agree with that? 
Am I  willing to  give  it that value? Am I  willing  to  set 
myself up for that vulnerability?" 

The realization emerges that we have the power to 
resource ourselves and to recontextualize our lives by 
seeing  how  we  are  setting  ourselves  up.  It brings  a 
state  of inner  joy  to  realize  that  we  alone  have  the 
choice and the power.We  are the ones who set up the 
meaning  and  give  these  things  the  power  over  us; 
therefore,  it  really  is  possible  to  come  out  of disap­
pointment, grief, sadness, and anger about the event, to 
even become indifferent and willing to look into it and 
re-experience the inner self. 

Actually, a depressive episode, even a brief one, has 
the potential for joy within it because it  is  something 
coming up in life, saying,"Look at me! Look at me! Here 
is a mistake that has been causing you pain and suffer­
ing for  endless amounts of time  and will  continue  to 
cause  you  pain  and  suffering  for  endless  amounts  of 
time."That inner state of joy and serenity really comes 
about from a knowingness of our own invulnerability. 
Therefore, even though the depression is not current­
ly present  clinically, the  knowledge  that  we  are  vul­
nerable  precludes  that  incredible  state  called  the 
peace of God, the knowing  that we  are  not separate 
from  the  source  of anything but are  connected with 
it, and that we are with God. 

DEPRESSION 

381 

How does one then experience that which, in body 

mind, and spirit, is  called spirit-that subtle knowing­
ness?  It can come from one of life's tragedies, or even 
from  a  minor  disappointment. All  these  things  have 
within them the  seed of truth  that is  always  present. 
That which is  the spirit and reveals  itself as  the truth 
behind consciousness is always present and can there­
fore  be  discovered  at  any  moment-in  moments  of 
high joy or depression. In Zen, it is said that heaven and 
hell are only a tenth of an inch apart. 

Personally, I have shared what I  have experienced, 
and  I  have  witnessed  the  truth  of what  I  am  talking 
about.  My  own  inner  experience  included  a  time  of 
great,  severe,  agonizing  depression  way  down  in  the 
pits  of Hell.  In  that  state  of absolute  hopelessness  in 
which time stopped, the experience went on for liter­
ally  eons  and eons. (In  severe  depression, the  experi­
ence of time is altered and each second seems like an 
eternity.)  In  those  eons,  there  was  no  hope. In  fact, 
there was a  sign that said, "All  ye who enter here give 
up  all  hope."  It  was  like  the  deepest  of the  hells  in 
Dante's Inferno. 

Out  of  the  experience  of  that  infinite  suffering 
and  agony,  out  of that  total  feeling  of abandonment 
and being separated from love and God, there suddenly 
came an inner voice that said, "If there is a God, I ask 
Him for help." From the pits of agony, by a profound, 
deep surrender, suddenly there was the awareness of 
an  Infinite  Presence  of Eternal  Love  and  the  silent 
Knowingness  of  Truth.  With  the  collapse  of  the 
ego/self, the mind became silent and disappeared into 
the  Self. The  event  heralded  a, major  transformation 

382 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that has been described in other writings. 

Self-healing  is  the  willingness  to  love  and  forgive 
ourselves, to  look  at  our vulnerability  and  call  it  our 
humann~ss.It is the capacity to love our humanness for 
its weaknesses, errors, and foibles  in order to see that 
within  this  humanness,  as  mistaken  as  it  might  be, 
there is  a primordial, intrinsic innocence. 

The only thing that is  certain in the phenomenal 
aspect  of  this  world  and  its  expression  is  that  all 
things change. All  things change within human expe­
rience because human experience is that of change. If 
all things change and nothing remains the same, then 
to place the source of our happiness outside  ourself 
on  that  which  changes  means  it  is  only  a  matter of 
time  before  the  depression  ensues. If we  place  our 
security  on  that  which  is  transitory,  disappearing, 
coming and going, or changing, then the vulnerability 
is  ever present. 

That simple mistake, which we all make, is common 

to the whole human condition and arises out of some­
thing that is also the same in aU of us and which can be 
rediscovered  right  in  the  pain  of  experience-the 
intrinsic  innocence  of consciousness itself, the  intrin­
sic innocence of our own inner self.We can see this in 
two different ways. First, by reaching that state of com­
passion ourselves, we attain such a level of conscious­
ness that we literally see into the hearts of others; we 
just see and know that innocence. The  second way is 
through introspection to see how this arose. 

We  notice  the  primordial innocence of the  child 
who  is  innately  trusting. The  child  has  faith  in  the 
integrity  of adults, and  it  never  dawns  in  the  child's 

DEPRESSION 

383 

mind  to  doubt  the  truth  of what  is  being  told. The 
young child loves its parents and those extensions of 
parents called teachers, other family members, peers, 
playmates, television, and commercials. A child looks 
at a  commercial as  though it were  just as  truthful as 
its  parents  because  of the  child's  trustingness, open­
ness, lovingness, and  lack of paranoia. The  innocent, 
trusting mind is easily programmed, and therefore, out 
of its  innocence, it  begins  to  buy what it hears. The 
child identifies with those whom it loves as family.As 
the programs start coming in, the purity of the child 
becomes  programmed  because  of  its  intrinsic  inno­
cence. Due to that innocence, it buys such statements 
as, "All  of us  are  allergic," "Heart  disease  runs  in  our 
family," or, "We all have a weight problem in our family." 
All  the  negative  programs  are  bought  by  the 
child's innocence. We  might say that the child's mind 
is  like  the  hardware  of a  computer, which will  play 
any software  program that is  installed on it. And yet, 
the  nature  of the  hardware,  that  which  is  truly  the 
computer itself, is unchanged. No matter what CD we 
play,  no  matter what  software  programs  we  play  on 
the  computer,  the  intrinsic  innocence,  purity,  and 
integrity of the hardware has not been sullied. It has 
not changed at  all.  Even  if all  the programs  are  erro­
neous, the hardware remains the same. 

Within the  adult remains that same childlike con­
sciousness, with its  innocence, purity of motive, and 
capacity to remain pure no matter what the programs 
may be. It remains  essential  and  unchanged in  all  of 
us. It is exactly what is reading these words right now. 
It is the childlike consciousness, with all its purity and 

384 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

innocence, that is  reading this  teaching  right now­
not the person or personality, but that consciousness 
in all its simple purity. 

Even  if the  person  who  is  reading  says, "I  don't 
believe a word of it," where does that statement come 
from?  It  comes  from  another  belief system  that  the 
child bought out of innocence. The father says, "Don't 
trust anybody," or some disappointing experience sets 
up the program within the child's mind. "Don't trust 
anything  you  hear."  So  if we  are  saying  to  ourself, "I 
don't  believe  anything  he  says,"  we  are  saying  that 
because, out  of the  childlike  innocence, we  bought 
that program. "The way to  be secure in this world is 
to be mistrusting, skeptical, and not believe anything 
you  hear or you  will  be  misled  down  the  primrose 
path."  However,  the  nature  of  the  innocence  that 
bought that program remains  the same  because it is 
trying to listen to the truth and discern that which is 
truth out of its hopefulness and trustingness. It is hop­
ing to hear that which will be helpful, nurture life, and 
relieve  suffering. The cynic has been programmed to 
be mistrustful. 

When we look within ourself now with the inten­
tion  of self-healing,  we  see  that  intrinsic  innocence 
and  understand what  program  was  set  up.  Now we 
have to re-own that innocence which is  so crucial in 
all  spiritual  work  as  well  in  personal  psychological 
research and introspection. It is  important to  always 
keep within our awareness that whatever we bought 
was  out  of  the  beauty  of  that  which  we  are.  We 
bought  it  out  of  our  own  love,  trustingness,  and 
integrity  because  we  projected  our  own  integrity 

DEPRESSION 

385 

onto the world and thought it was a place we could 
trust in and believe anything we heard or read. 

We were programmed to believe that sometimes it 
is very useful to lie, to tell someone that "The check is 
in the mail." We  were programmed with the idea that 
the  only way to survive as  a  body in this world is  to 
tailor  the  truth  a  little  bit  (called  'creative  business 
ethics'), but did we not buy that out of our. own inno­
cence? We  thought  that  was what  one  had  to  do  in 
this  world  to  survive,  so  we  guessed we  had  to  do 
that. Of course, when we  do  that, we pay the price. 
Anytime  we  go  below  the  line  at  200,  we  pay  the 
price,  which  is  the  loss  of  our  power  within  the 
world. 

That  is  what  the  anger  is  all  about-"I  lost  my 
power. The  source  of  my  happiness  will  never  be 
returned to me because it is outside of myself. I have 
projected it  out there." The healing of it  comes from 
the willingness to look at the truth of it, to say to one­
self, "Out of my innocence, like other humans on this 
planet, like most of us, in fact, I bought a  certain way 
of looking at life in which the source of happiness is, 
first of all, outside myself, and secondly, it is always in 
the future." 

The  separation  from  the  source  of happiness  is 

not only in space, but it is also in time, so it is  some­
thing that is going to come into our life tomorrow, or 
the  next  day,  or the  next week, or the  year  after,  or 
when we finally.graduate, or when we reach middle 
age,  or  when  we  get  that  big  house  or  Cadillac. 
Because it is always in the future, we are always  sepa­
rated from the source of our happiness and never feel 

386 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

complete. The  realization  that  we  are  the  source  of 
our happiness, and  that we  can  create  it  at  any sec­
ond, gives us a sense of completion.The sense of com­
pletion  runs  concomitantly  with  the  experience  of 
life,  so  it  can  be  cut  off at  any  second  yet  still  feel 
complete. 

If we  suddenly  stop writing at  this  moment, it  is 
already complete just as it is. To  the best of my ability, 
I  have  said  exactly  what  I  want  to  say.  At  this 
moment, I  am being with the experience of the joy 
of doing the best I  can. Joyfulness  accompanies the 
experience.There is no tomorrow about it because of 
the sense of completion. If someone enjoys the pres­
entation, so much the better. That is  only frosting on 
the cake because it is  not essential. 

What  one  does  in the world has  to  be  accompa­
nied by the sense of completion in the doing  of the 
thing  itself. The  payoff  is  not  something  that  is  an 
aside, something that is  outside or separate from the 
doingness; it is  ~he  experience of it in this  moment. 
The  completion is  with the experiencing right now, 
not  something  separate  from  it.  In  that,  one  is  then 
aware of the lovingness  of all  experience. That is  the 
way one is  with experience. It is  the loving of life  in 
all its expressions, including its disappointments. It is 
the ups and downs, the continual learning process of 
making the mistake and learning from it, so it is noth­
ing but a mistake. 

One  might  say  that  depression  is  nature's  way, 
God's way, and our own psychology's way of saying to 
us that the way we look at our life is not okay. It is our 
psychological,  biological,  and  spiritual way;  it  is  our 

DEPRESSION 

387 

body, mind, and spirit saying,"Look at what is out; look 
at what needs to be ftxed. Please  understand me out 
of your compassion; heal me; heal all of it."The defect 
is  an  inner  sense  of separation  that  we  will  not  be 
complete and whole unless we become united with 
something 'out there' or in the future. The ego moves 
from  incomplete  to  complete.  In  contrast,  the  Self 
moves from complete to complete. True happiness is 
.always  in the 'right now' of this  moment. The  ego is 
always anticipating completion and satisfaction in the 
future 'when' a desire gets fulfilled. 

Clinically, there is often a difference between men 
and  women  in  the  precipitating  event  that  leads  to 
suicide ·or  depression. Men  experience  the Presence 
of  God  within  them  or  their  connection  to  God 
very often in the form of power. The three classical 
attributes of God are omnipresence, omniscience, and 
omnipotence,  so  God  is  often  experienced  in  the 
unconscious of men as  connection with power. Men 
seek  that  power,  and  frequently  .the  precipitating 
event leading to their depression is feeling  separated 
from  the  source  of  their  power.  In  this  case,  the 
power has been out in the world, so it would be the 
loss of a title, a business, or the status symbols that sig­
nify the power; the sense of separation and vulnerabil­
ity  that  has  not  really  been  healed  remains  there. 
Therefore,  money,  position,  and  power  become  the 
traditional goals of men. 

Women  commonly  experience  their  connection 

with God in the unconscious more in the form of rela­
tionships. Remember the example of the old woman 
who sat in the rocking chair, rocking back and forth, 

388 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

staring  hopelessly out the  window?  She  had  experi­
enced  lovingness  coming  through  that  relationship 
with her son and was feeling cut off from it.The inter­
ruption  of that  was  the  precipitating  factor. We  see 
that  the  basic  problem  is  still  the  same  in  the  two 
sexes;  it  just  takes  different  forms  and  different 
expressions. 

Depression leads us into the whole subject of sui­
cide. When  looking  at  suicide,  we  see  that  what  is 
desired is not really the death of the body but release 
from  suffering. The body did not create the  dilemma 
nor can it experience the dilemma.Therefore, the idea 
that if one gets rid of the body, one will get rid of the 
source  is  fallacious.  The  body  neither  created  the 
dilemma  nor  experienced  it. The  whole  problem  is 
going  on in  consciousness; therefore, the  solution  is 
within  consciousness. Looking  at the  nature  of con­
sciousness itself and seeing that is where the problem 
arose  and where  it  is  being  experienced, one  there­
fore  sees  that  is  also  where  it  has  to  be  solved. The 
solution is to realize that what is desired is the release 
from suffering. 

The mind identifies itself with the body and thinks 
it  is  a  body. The  loss  of the  energy of life  is  because 
the person is dispirited, which leads to a  decrease in 
energy. Many deaths are really subtle forms of passive 
suicide. There is loss of the sense of aliveness, excite­
ment, and  commitment  to  life.  Passive  suicide  takes 
many forms, statistically showing up as an automobile 
accident or the failure  to get out of the way of a bus. 
For some reason, the person just did not care enough 
to  take  the precautions, did not care  enough to love 

DEPRESSION 

389 

their life  or value it enough to care for and preserve 
it. Passive  suicide  takes  the  form  of the  person who 
ignores  their  physical  disease,  such  as  the  diabetic 
who just does not care to stay on their diet or take the 
insulin, thus  going  into  insulin  reactions, overdoses, 
and  diabetic  coma, with three, four,  or five  times  in 
the hospital in a coma until they succumb. 

In the  addictions, that  is  traditionally  seen in  the 
form of an overdose. How could it be a miscalculation 
.for a person who has taken multiple drugs for twenty 
years and then dies of an overdose? They are  experts 
in  psychopharmacology who  dose  themselves  thou­
sands of times and then die; it is called an accident. In 
an  automobile. accident  where  the  driver  was  just 
careless, what we really see is the lack of the desire to 
live. The failure  to heed health advice or to take care 
of one's health and assets indicates .the loss of energy 
that  results  in  the  loss  of  aliveness  coming  from 
entrapment. There  are feelings  of deflation; then one 
becomes  dispirited  and  unconsciously  seeks  a  way 
out so  they do  not have  to  feel  guilty.  One  does  not 
have to feel  guilty that· they died of a  diabetic coma. 
They did not bother to alter their lifestyle  to prevent 
that coronary heart attack. 

If we realize that what we want is the release from 

suffering,  that  then  comes  about  through  an  under­
standing  of  the  nature  of  consciousness  itself  and 
going  into  the  processes  that  have  already  been 
described. We have to have the willingness to experi­
ence out all the symptoms that are being experienced 
and  to  look  at  our life  using  a  technique  called  the 
'worst-case  scenario'. We  sit  down,  look  at  life,  and 

390 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ask,  "What  is  the  worst  possible  outcome?"  We 
become aware of the feeling that arises with that and 
then let go of resisting it, constantly canceling out the 
thoughts about it and handling the feeling directly. As 
that  progresses,  we  will  notice  that  the  symptoms 
begin to abate.We come out of the depression willing 
to look at the fear, at the way it was set up, and how 
we got it set up. We  experience the anger about that 
and then use  the  energy of the  anger to want some­
thing  better  for  ourself,  now  having  the  courage  to 
face  how it all came about. 

It  really  means  that  we  have  to  recontextualize 
our whole life. We have to look at everything in it and 
say  to  ourself, "How can I  hold this  so  it will  have  a 
value great enough that if it left my life, I  would still 
see that which is worth living for? To what about this 
can  I  dedicate  my  life?  What  about  my  job  gives  it 
meaning and significance?  How can I  move to a larg­
er way of holding it?  How can I  see  it in such a way 
that my value  as  a  human being will not be changed 
if that should leave my life?" 

We have to look at our goals and motives.What are 
we willing to dedicate our life to? What has significant 
meaning? Service to others? Even if we lost all capac­
ity to serve our own life, what is the meaning of being 
of service to others? 

There are people with all  kinds of disfigurements 
and losses who go on with their lives. Somehow life 
still  has  meaning for  them. Does  that  mean that we 
are  weaker  than  they  are  or  that  they  are  morally 
superior? No. It means that they have somehow found 
some greater meaning in their lives. They have had to 

DEPRESSION 

391 

let go of a lesser meaning and fmd a greater meaning. 
So  depression means that we have settled for a small­
er  meaning,  something  that  is  much  less  than  the 
truth. We  have  to  reexamine  and  see  what  was  the 
true  meaning  of that in  our life; What  about  our life 
makes  it worthwhile, even without that?  Correction 
occurs  by  asking  ourselves  very  simple  questions. 
Where  are  our vulnerabilities? They are  some  aspect 
of what we think we could not live  without, and on 
which we have based our survival. 

The technique is  to first find out where the areas 

of vulnerability lie. We  can sit down and picture los­
ing that from our life. We then go through the process 
of letting go of resisting all the feelings that come up 
and  contact  our  own  inner  consciousness-the 
unconscious, the God within us, our super conscious­
ness,  our  intuition-to  begin  an  inner  questioning 
search. All  of us have to do that. What is  the meaning 
of our  life?  What  is  its  significance?  What  is  worth 
dying for? What is worth living for? What do we value 
that is  greater than that which is  limited and tempo­
rary? By removing all these things one by one, we fmd 
that  who  we  are  is  growing  in  stature. We  are  no 
longer so vulnerable to external events because there 
are always two things happening. 

There is the event going on 'out there' as we see it 
in ordinary consciousness, and then there is  how we 
feel  about it, which depends on our attitude. We  can 
decide how we want to be with it and what our rela­
tionship is to that event. For example, I am one thing, 
and  the  event  is  something  else. I  have  power  over 
how I want to hold it, how I want to value that rela­

392 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

- - - - - - -

tionship, and how I want to picture it. I have to decide 
whether I'm willing to give it power over my life.Am 
I willing to give money enough power over my life so 
that if I lose it, I no longer desire to live? Am I willing 
to give possessions, titles, degrees, or cars that power? 
Think of all the things people value greater than their 
own lives, and you can see the enormous vulnerability. 
The high suicide rate is  regarded as  one of the most 
important causes  of death, especially in adolescents. 
What does that say about the values that we are teach­
ing them? What are the transitory things we tell them 
to base their lives on? 

We have to reevaluate for ourselves the importance 
and meaning of our lives and ask what we hold that is 
of sufficient value to preserve us in the face of any kind 
of loss.  Out  of that  inner understanding  then  comes 
our  reevaluation  of  the  relationship  between  body, 
mind, and spirit, because it is  mind that is  setting  our 
goals and purposes. 

If we begin to question our values and reevaluate 
our position with them, whether we like the term or 
not, we are really doing· spiritual work. What is  spirit? 
What is the energy of life itself? We have a decision to 
make  about  its  form.  We  can  decide  what  to  give 
meaning and value to. Within that energy field  called 
consciousness, we have great freedom. It is up to our 
own inner choice. By merely seeing that we have the 
choice  of what we want to give value  to, we re-own 
our  power. We  move  up  from  victim  to  source  and 
begin to accept the return of our own power, which 
we have given away to the world.With that comes an 
inner state of serenity from experiencing the value of 

DEPRESSION 

393 

our existence, knowing  that  we  need  no  proof, and 
that the  world  does  not  have  to  do  anything. We  do 
not need to bring home any trophies to give  it value 
because  we  see  its  value  within  ourselves. We  see, 
treasure,  and  hold  sacred  the  value  of life  itself. We 
accept  that  which  is  given  to  us  with  thanks. With 
gratitude  we  hold the  essence  of that  which we  are 
without asking that the world give  us back anything 
that we have demanded of it. 

In doing that, we move  into an invulnerable posi­
tion. We  are  no  longer prone to the  disappointment, 
anger, rage, or turning against ourselves with thoughts 
of  sUicide-that  hopeless,  fallacious  idea  that  by 
killing the body, we will kill the source of our suffer­
ing. By  owning that  we, ourselves, are  the  source  of 
our suffering, we transcend it. By transcending it, we 
bring about that inner healing, which is  the purpose 
of this chapter. 

CHAPTER  13 

Alcoholism 

To  understand  the  nature  of alcoholism  and  addic­
tion,  we  will  approach  the  subject  from  the  view­
point of consciousness  itself in  order to  discern  the 
essential nature  of the  addictive  process rather than 
its  symptoms, consequences,  or  physical  correlates. 
Talking about the nature of consciousness will give us . 
a different context in which to understand the addic­
tive  process  and  its  expression  as  a  problematic 
human behavior. 

The  Map  of  Consciousness  will  again  be  refer­
enced  throughout  this  chapter,  as  it  has  been  very 
useful  in our research. It will help to  make  informa­
tion understandable that has previously been consid­
ered  mystical,  esoteric,  or  too  'right  brain'  for  left­
brain people to comprehend. On the Map, various lev­
els of consciousness have been calibrated to indicate 
the  relative  power  of these  energy  fields  and  their 
positive  or negative  direction. By  studying the chart, 
we will begin to  understand a  lot of new and useful 
information about human behavior, and from that, we 
will come to fully understand addictions. 

On the  Map,  note  that  Enlightenment, or leaving 
the  world  of  duality,  calibrates  at  about  600. The 
energy field of Courage is  at 200, and Pride is  at 175. 
We  will  refer to  these  numbers later on. It  is  impor­
tant to notice that the direction of the arrows shows 
whether the energy field is negative and not amicable 
to life  or is positive and supportive of life. 

In  understanding  addiction,  we  need  to  first 
understand the nature of consciousness and then see 

395 

396 

how it applies to the addictive process. We  will look 
at  the  true  nature  of addiction  and  the  quality  that 
society missed because its understanding of addiction 
was  nil  until  the  advent  of Alcoholics  Anonymous 
(AA).  Prior to AA,  the  recovery  rate  from  addictions 
was  zero, and  it was  rarely  heard that  anybody  ever 
recovered from  alcoholism. The truth was  represented 
by Dr. Carl Jung who said that science had no answer 
for  this  problem, that  something  above  and  beyond 
ordinary  human  experience  had  to  be  sought,  and 
that the answer would be found in spirituality. 

We  will  review  the  connection  between  body, 
mind, and  spirit. What  is  the  relationship  among  the 
three, and what is  spirit, anyway? What is the nature 
of spirit, and how does it operate in a real way that we 
can verify through  our own clinical  experience? We 
will  not  be  discussing  philosophy  or  theology  but 
instead will be exploring what we can verify for our­
selves  through  our  own  inner  experience. We  will 
look  at  truth  as  it  can  be  experienced  within  our­
selves and learn how this can be applied to the under­
standing of alcoholism, the addictions, and its impor­
tance in recovery. 

We will emphasize the importance of context, or 
the  overall  way  in  which we  hold  a  thing,  and  the 
paradigm  from  Which  to  understand  a  subject. 
Context creates meaning and illuminates the under­
standing of addiction. 

As  previously  described  on 

the  Map  of 
Consciousness, levels  below 600 represent the  levels 
of the ego, which is called the 'self', and within the ego 
are  different energy fields, as  mentioned previously. 

ALCOHOLISM 

397 

At  the  bottom  of the  Map  are  the  energy  fields  of 
Guilt, Shame, and Apathy, and to the right of each field 
is  the  primary  emotion  of how  we  experience  that 
field  in  daily  life. To  the  right  of that  is  the  process 
going on within consciousness itself. That energy field 
also  determines  how  we  experience  and  see  the 
world,  and  how  we  relate  to  the  understanding  of 
God, which is due to the limitation of the energy field. 
The energy field of Shame is at level 20, and Guilt 
is  at  level  30. These  are  states  of negativity  that  are 
usually  experienced  in  the  form  of self-hatred. The 
world is  seen as  a  place  of sin  and  suffering. At  this 
level,  God  is  perceived  to  be  possibly  the  ultimate 
threat or destroyer of the soul because He will throw 
the soul into destruction and hellfire forever. The levels 
of Guilt  and  Shame  are  the lowest energy fields  and 
contain very little power. 

When we  move  up to  the  energy field  of 50, we 
discover  a  field  of hopelessness  and  despair. This  is 
like  the  old  lady  previously  described  rocking  back 
and forth in her rocking chair, staring out the window 
after  she  got  the  notice  from  the  Department  of 
Defense that her son was killed in  action. Her family 
shakes her, trying to get her to respond, but she does 
not  respond  to  anything  because,  in  these  energy 
fields, there are changes in brain chemistry. 

Hopelessness,  despair,  and  depression  represent 
the  process  of the  loss  of energy  that  accompanies 
the lower levels  of consciousness. The world is  seen 
as  hopeless, and if there were a  God, He would have 
nothing to do with us because our own self-esteem is 
so  low. We  call  it  the  worm's  view  of the  nature  of 

398 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

God. If we get the person out of that very low energy 
field,  we  can  get  them  up  to  a  higher  energy  field 
called Grief. 

People  in  hopelessness  cannot  help  themselves, 
and we have to pour energy into them to even move 
them up to the energy field of Grief that calibrates at 
75, which has a  lot more  energy than  hopelessness. 
Grief also has a  certain biological purpose, for exam­
ple, when the child cries to summon its mother. It has 
the  power to  pull  some  kind  of response  from  the 
world. The emotion that accompanies Grief is regret, 
a feeling of loss, and despondency. The process going 
on in consciousness at this level is dispirited. Spirit is 
that high  energy out of which all  life  manifests. The 
person in Grief then sees this as a very sad world with 
an unloving God who does not really care for anyone. 
If we go back to the old lady who is  rocking back 
and  forth  in  her  rocking  chair  and  not  eating  or 
responding,  and  a 
the 
Department  of  Defense  saying  that  the  previous 
telegram was a mistake, and her son Joey was not killed 
but is still alive, the old lady just goes right on rocking 
back  and  forth,  staring  out  the  window. If we  could 
pour energy into her up to the level of Grief, suddenly 
she would begin to cry.The expression of that emotion 
would indicate to us that she is getting better. 

telegram  arrives  from 

Interestingly, these two energy states come out of 
the failure  to face the energy field that lies just above 
it, which is Fear.The energy field of Fear, at calibration 
level  100, is  still  a negative emotion as shown by the 
direction of the arrow. We  can run a  long way out of 
fear, so although the form of the emotion itself is not 

ALCOHOLISM 

399 

constructive, the energy out of it can be utilized in a 
very  positive  way. All  these  energy  fields  have  their 
upside  and  their  downside. The  downside  affects  us 
negatively;  in  contrast, the  upside  can  be  very  con­
structive in our lives. We  generally experience fear in 
ordinary life  as worry, anxiety, and panic, but eventu­
ally, it can escalate to become paralyzing terror. 

Grief has  to do with the  past, and fear  has  to  do 

with  the  future. The  process  going  on  in. conscious­
ness is one of deflation.The fearful animal shrinks and 
hides. For example, when, as child in the third grade, 
the teacher asked for a response to a question, we can 
remember  how we  used  to  shrink and  hide  behind 
the  person  in  front  of  us.  We  shrink  and  become 
deflated, and the perception of the world that comes 
out of this  energy field is  that it is  a  frightening  and 
threatening place, and that God is very punitive. He is 
seen as  a punisher and much to be feared because of 
the holding of all the senses of sin, guilt, and low self­
esteem in this  level  of consciousness. This  level  sees 
God as the most frightening of all possibilities. 

We  can move a person out of Fear and up to  the 
next energy field called Desire at level 125, which has 
a  lot  of energy. Desire  is  'want', so  its  expression  in 
our ordinary emotions is that of wanting and craving. 
This can eventually become an obsession or compul­
sion. We  then  we  call  it  an  addiction  because  the 
process  going  on in consciousness  is  one of entrap­
ment. A  person  becomes  entrapped  and  is  at  the 
effect of that level  and fun by the desire. It takes  on 
the intensity of craving, which in turn becomes asso­
ciated with an inner image.To recover from addiction, 

400 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

it  is  necessary  to  eliminate  an  attractive  image  the 
moment it emerges in the mind, whether it refers to a 
sexual  image,  gambling,  or  alcohol.  If  the  image  is 
allowed to linger, it gains energy and qUickly becomes 
too strong to resist. Recovery depends on the willing­
ness to eliminate the image immediately and decisively. 
If delayed, the image becomes too strong to obliterate 
and its attraction soon wins. 

It  is  the  purpose  of  the  marketing  industry,  of 
course, to  take  advantage  of our desires  by creating 
wanting  and  craving  to  get  us  entrapped so we will 
want their products. Once we become entrapped by 
the desire, whether it is  for a fancy car, a  certain per­
fume, or a shampoo that is going to make us lovely, it 
will run us. We will give up our money and energy to 
buy their products. 

Desiringness, however, leads  to  the view that the 

world is  very frustrating. The difficulty with wanting­
ness  is  that  all  the  wantings  can  run  people  for  an 
entire lifetime, which leads to the sense of frustration 
as  well as  resentment because wantingness does  not 
cure itself by getting; it just leads to additional wanti­
ngness. The wantingness, in and of itself, is  not satis­
fied, so this  constant frustration leads to a picture of 
God from whom we are separated. In other words, the 
God  who  forever  withholds  from  us  what  we  want 
easily leads' us to anger, which is  the next level. 

Anger,  at  level  150,  as  everyone  is  aware,  has  a 
great deal of energy in it. It is  still a negative emotion 
. with a destructive downside, but the energy of anger, 
if one  knows  how  to  use  it,  can be  very useful. We 
experience the energy of anger in everyday life with­

ALCOHOLISM 

401 

in the emotions of resentment, within the feelings  of 
hatred  and  anger  at  ourself,  within  grievances  and 
grudges,  and  in  the  unwillingness  to  forgive.  The 
process  in  consciousness  is  one  of expansion, so  as 
the  angry  animal  swells  up  with  anger,  it  becomes 
larger than life.The person who is angry puffs up with 
the  angriness  and  tries  to  become  imposing  on  the 
biological level. 

Angriness  then  leads  to  competitiveness.  The 
angry  person  sees  a  world  of competition, conflict, 
war, and 'me against you' . It is  a polarized position of 
opponents, and therefore the view of God at that level 
is an angry God. The person sees God as the ultimate 
angriness, the  God  of vengeance, and  the  God  who 
gets even. He is the God who represents the energy of 
the  spleen out of revenge, hatred, and  anger. It is  as 
though he  now hates that which he created and the 
humanness of that which he created. He is the God of 
retaliatory, vengeful angriness. 

If we  move  up  out  of this  angriness  to  Pride  at 
level  175, we  see  that pride  has a  lot of energy  and 
can be a very useful emotion.The difficulty with pride 
is  that its  energy field  is  still in a  negative  direction. 
Its downside is  denial, and in the addictions, this can 
be fatal when it takes the form of arrogance and con­
tempt by saying, "Well, those people need it, but not 
me. I'm different." That  comes out  of the process  of 
inflation  that  is  going  on in  consciousness. The  ego 
reflects an inflated sense of self, which is a very dan­
gerous  position. Therefore,  we  see  the  pridefulness 
that  eventually  leads  to  the  destruction  of  people 
who get into drugs but who are successful in life.This 

402 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

leads to inflation of the ego and the denial that goes 
with it, along with the inability to hear the advice  of 
others.  Pridefulness  thus  leads  to  a  very  vulnerable 
defensiveness. It is  not a good position to be in, but it 
is  an energy that we can utilize  to  move from Anger 
up to Courage and out of the field of Pride. 

The person in Pride is very preoccupied with sta­
tus, ownership, havingness, symbols, and labels, which 
puts one in a very defensive  position. How does that 
energy field,  which  comes  out  of denial,  arrogance, 
contempt,  and  an  inflated  energy  field,  influence 
one's view of God? The  relationship to God will usu­
ally be one of two possibilities. Out of the arrogance 
of the intellect can arise the presumption that the left 
brain has  the  capacity to  know all  of truth, resulting 
in the position of atheism. Atheism  is  a  denial of the 
truth  of what  can  be  experienced  through  human 
experience; or, it can take its opposite in the form of 
bigotry. It could be in the form of the religionist who 
takes the position that 'my way' of seeing things is the 
only way, and because my way is  the truth, your way 
is  not. Pride is  a  condition that polarizes, making the 
position of everyone else wrong, or 'me against you' , 
or 'us  against them', and it is  the basis  of all  the reli­
gious wars. Pride  has  the  potential, however, to  be  a 
useful  energy,  as  the  Marine  Corps  has  discovered, 
and it is  useful  to  move  on through  it  to  the  higher 
energy field called Courage. 

Courage  is  a  very crucial level  because, as  we can 
see, the  arrow  on  the  Map  of Consciousness  is  now 
neutral, meaning the energy field  of that level of con­
sciousness  has  now shifted to  neutral. It is  as  though 

ALCOHOLISM 

403 

the antenna that was tuned to 'negative' is  now tuned 
to  'neutral'.  It stops  pulling  negative  experiences  to 
itself. Its energy field is  200, which has a lot of power. 
Courage  has  enough energy in it to  settle  the  United 
States of America, to get mankind to the moon, and to 
establish a civilization to explore the intellectual frontiers. 
Courage  at  200  has  enough  energy  to  create  all 
the  great  industrial  empires.  It  is  a  very  powerful 
energy  field,  not  because  it  jumped  up  twenty-five 
points but because the direction of the field is  differ­
ent. Much of the  resistance  has  dropped off,  and for 
the first time, the person at that level is now emotion­
ally able to face, cope, look at, and handle things. The 
critical  process  going  on in  consciousness  is  that of 
the person becoming empowered. 

The willingness  to tell  the  truth  allowed  this  huge 
jump  in  power. This  is  crucial  in  understanding  the 
addictions and the traditional 'twelve steps' because it is 
the first step-the admission that one is powerless over 
alcohol and drugs, which make one's life  unbearable­
that changes  this  entire  energy field  and  re-empowers 
the person, putting them in a position of recovery. 

When a  person starts  telling  the truth, their view 
of the world from this energy field of Courage is  that 
of opportunity. It appears to be a world of challenge, 
a very exciting world in which to grow and experience 
personal  growth.  Out  of this  energy  field,  a  positive 
view of God opens up to the mind. For the first time, 
the person really tells the truth from their own expe­
rience. They  have  not  really  had  an  experience  of 
what is  called  God within  the  universe, so now the 
mind  opens  for  the  first  time. The  person  begins  to 

404 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ask  the  traditional  questions  that have  always  led to 
the ultimate realization of the truth: "Is  there  a  God? 
Can  He  be  experienced?  Is  Divinity  a  Higher Power 
that I can verify within myself? Is God something'out 
there'  or  within  me?  How  does  a  Higher  Power 
express itself? How can I get to know that?" 

The whole spiritual exploration then commences 
at  the  beginning  of self-honesty  because  that  is  the 
[lIst level of integrity of empowerment. The capacity 
to tell the truth releases the power to face, cope, and 
handle things, and, for the fIrst time, to be appropriate. 
Out  of  the  energy  fIeld  of  Courage  arises  the 
strength to look at the facts and admit the truth about 
them. From  here  it is  possible  to let go  of resistance 
and move up to the next energy fIeld  called Neutral. 
We  can  see  that  the  arrow  is  now  very  positively 
going  upwards  on  the  Map.  The  energy  fIeld  has 
jumped  to  250,  a  level  that  is  experienced  as  being 
free  and  unattached. Once we  tell  the  truth about a 
thing,  we  may  move  up  to  a  process  that  we  call 
'nonattached'in that one is  no longer attached to the 
outcome. It is then okay, whichever way it goes.A per­
son  at  this  energy level  then  might  say, "If I  get  the 
job, it's great, and if I don't get the job, that's okay, too, 
because  I will just fInd  another one." Or, "If this  rela­
tionship  doesn't  work  out, then  I  will  fInd  another 
relationship." 

There  i~  the  experience  of the  okayness  of  the 

world and a sense of God as being the source of free­
dom. There  is  the freedom  to  grow, expand, become 
conscious, .and  begin to  look into  one's  self and the 
nature  of human  experience. The  God  of this  level 

ALCOHOLISM 

405 

looks favorably on the exploration of one's own con­
sciousness. Neutral is a level of comfort. 

The upside of Neutral is that it can move up to the 
state called Willingness, which calibrates at 310. It has 
a  lot  more  power  and  energy  because, for  the  ftrst 
time, positive  intention becomes operative  and  says, 
"Yes." At  the  Neutral level, there  is  a  lack of enthusi­
asm. For  example, it is  okay to go  to the  movies, yet 
actually okay to stay home.There is not much positive 
energy there yet. However, letting go  of the negative 
creates space for willingness to come in, and there is 
the  beginning  of  enthusiasm  and  a  very  positive 
energy. We  say, "Yes, we are agreeable. We  are willing." 
This willingness takes us out of indifference, flatness, 
and detachment, and we begin to experience this as a 
friendly  world. The  questions  of God  and  life  itself 
become promising and l,1opeful  because now we are 
saying 'yes' to life. Willingness opens up the opportu­
nity  for  the  next  step,  which  is  moving  out  of 
Willingness to the level ofAcceptance. 

Acceptance calibrates at 380, and a person at that 

level is adequate, conftdent, and capable.This transfor­
mation of consciousness occurs as we begin to re-own 
our own power.All the ftelds below Courage are con­
ditions of victimhood in which we have  sold out the 
source of our power and given it away to the world. 
This  will  be· extremely  important  as  we  look  at  the 
addiction-the  giving  away  of  O1,lr  power  to  that 
which is  outside of us, thus bringing about the lower 
energy ftelds. 

The  person  who  is  moving  into Acceptance  is 
re-owning  that  they  are  the  source  of happiness  in 

406 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

their  life.  Below  that  level,  people  think  that  the 
source  of  happiness  lies  outside  themselves.  They 
think it comes  about through 'getting'. These  are  all 
conditions  of lack in which  happiness  is  dependent 
on whether one gets  that  car, title,  job, relationship, 
degree, money, or whateyer it is, but it is always  out­
side of oneself. In the addictions, it becomes, "If I get 
the right dose of that drug  ...."The thought that the 
source  of happiness  is  outside  oneself accompanies 
all  these states of weakness and victimhood. 

The  person  on the  level  of Acceptance, through 
willingness and letting go of resistance, has accepted 
that  they  are  the  source  of happiness  in  their  life. 
There  then  arises  the  conviction  of  self-sufficiency 
and  the  capacity to  create  something  that  is  satisfy­
ing. As  a  result,  that  person  is  no  longer  limited  by 
powerlessness or victimhood.That person knows that 
if they are  put on a  desert  island  some  place, a year 
later  they will  have  a  coconut  factory  going,  a  tree 
house built, or be teaching French to the natives. The 
person will have found a relationship and even started 
a new family. 

There is  the power to .recreate life  for oneself. In 
prison, there is  suicide, but on the other hand, there 
are  those  who  have  earned  college  degrees.  People 
have  changed  the  course  of  all  human  history  and 
written powerful and brilliant books while in prison, 
which  demonstrate  that  the  power  is  not  in  the 
prison but instead within the self. The capacity exists 
to use  even the  prison experience in  a  valuable  and 
positive way in order to create a great novel, book, or 
political treatise. Some  of the  most influential  books 

ALCO H 0  LI S,M 

407 

ever written were created under extreme conditions. 
An aspect ofAcceptance is the openness to reason 
and rationality as guiding principles of life rather than 
just the emotions that predominate at the lower energy 
fields.  'Think'  gains  importance  over  just  'feel'. 
Animals are run by emotions, instincts, and feelings, 
but  normal, healthy  humans, by virtue  of the  evolu­
tion of the brain's prefrontal cortex, have. developed 
the  capacity for  intellectual  understanding  and  the 
comprehension  consequent  to  logic  and  abstract 
symbols. The  consciousness  levels  of the  400s  thus 
typify our modern society of education, information, 
and the critical utilization of intelligence.This leads to 
learning by means other than just trial and error. 

A person in  trouble  begins  to  search for  answers 

and  solutions, and inquiry eventually leads  to the  dis­
covery that recovery  is  possible  by' means  of proven 
programs, such as AA, whose success is represented by 
millions of recovered alcoholics worldwide over many 
decades. The  mind  is  the  useful  springboard  which 
learns by inquiry that there  is  a  way out of addiction 
and its accompanying hopelessness and despair. 

The acceptance that we are the source of happi­
ness then makes this seem like a harmonious world. 
As  we  move  upward  into  the  energy field  of Love, 
the vision  of God that comes out of this promising, 
hopeful view is  the beginning of the comprehension 
of the  God of mercy and forgiveness. Out of accept­
ance and owning the  power of what we are, and by 
moving more towards the truth, there arises the will­
ingness  to  become  truly  loving. This  takes  us  to  the 
powerful energy field of 500, the field of Love  itself. 

408 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

The level of Love is where true happiness prevails. 
We  can see why more and more gettingness-getting 
money,  sex,  power, positions,  and  all  the  rest-does 
not  bring  happiness.  It  brings  pleasure  and  only 
momentary  fulftllment. We  can  see  why  that  if fIfty 
million dollars will not make us happy, then seventy­
fIve  million dollars will not either because more mil­
lions  of dollars  are  still  below level  200; true  happi­
ness is associated with the higher level of 500, which 
is  the  beginning  of the  fIeld  of  Love  that  leads  to 
Unconditional Love  at level 540. 

Love is a stable energy fIeld that nurtures and .suP­
ports life, and out of which come forgiveness and the 
beginning of revelations into the truth of life. Within 
the  brain at an energy fIeld  of 500, and especially at 
540, there  is  the  release  of endorphins, which is  the 
correlation  of love  on  the  physical  level  within  the 
brain chemistry itself. The view of the world coming 
out of this lovingness is  a loving one, and God is one 
of unconditional  love  and forgiveness. This  is  a  very 
important  level  for  recovery from  the  addictions  as 
demonstrated  by  its  being  the  energy  field  of 
Alcoholics Anonymous. 

The twelve-step groups, which are based on spiri­
tual  principles, calibrate  at  an  energy fIeld  of 540, a 
critical level because it is  the  energy fIeld  of healing 
and unconditional  loving. It represents  commitment 
and  alignment.  Forgivingness  becomes  automatic 
because out of revelation, this kind of world is shown, 
and out of that understanding arises compassion. The 
capacity and desire to understand become foremost, 
and what is revealed is what becomes important. If a 

ALCOHOLISM 

409 

person  has  a  fractured  arm,  it  is  not  important 
whether they were right or wrong. It is just important 
to fix  it. Lovingness then becomes a  healingness  out 
of its intention to understand. It heals out of its power 
of compassion. 

This is a different energy field from the one usually 
called 'love' by the world, which is  often attachment 
and  emotionalized  sentimentality.  When  we  hear 
someone say, "Well, I used to love Joey, but I don't love 
him  anymore,"  what  they  really  mean  is  that  they 
never really loved Joey.They had a sentimental attach­
ment, a dependency, a back-and-forth control, a lustful 
attachment, and an ownership in an emotionality.That 
which is truly loving is a decision, an inner intention, 
and  a  commitment  that  create  a  stable,  unchanging 
energy field. We  see this  in the nonjudgmentalism of 
the twelve-step groups.When a member tells about an 
unfortunate  event,  the  group  is  nonjudgmental  and 
supportive.  That  unconditional  love  arises  because 
the group is relating to the person's beingness. There 
is  the love  of the true self of who that person really 
is. Thus, there is the moving from the small self up to 
the large Self.The sustaining, nurturing, healing energy 
field  of the twelve-step groups prevails, regardless of 
the personalities.AA has a saying: "Just bring the body, 
and  you  will  get  it  by  osmosis." It places  principles 
above personalities and means that it is the uncondi­
tional  love  of the  healing  field  itself that  nurtures, 
supports,and brings about the miracle of recovery. 

The  importance  of  alignment  with  that  energy 
field  is  because  the  feeling  of gratitude, which  is  at 
about 540, is characteristic of AA.At this level are the 

410 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

values of laughter, humor, and the capacity for a differ­
ent way  of holding  experiences. Instead  of self-pity, 
fear, or anger and its expression as  resentment, there 
is  now  humor  about  the  experience,  which  at  the 
time  was perhaps  tragic. Because  of this  willingness 
to be forgiving and understanding, out of the healing 
nature of this energy field arise the joyful states char­
acterized  by  compassion  and  the  desire  to  heal 
through  understanding.  This  transition  marks  the 
beginning  of transfiguration  in  one's  consciousness, 
the  beginning  of seeing  the  perfection of the  world 
and experiencing the oneness of all things and all life. 
At the consciousness levels of the high 500s, there 
emerges  an  energy field  called  Ecstasy.  It is  not the 
'jumping up and down' kind of emotionalism but an 
inner  experience  of  extreme  joy  that  eventually 
evolves  into  states  generically  called  Bliss.  These 
blissful  states  express  as  feelings  of expansive  well­
being, of being  at  one with  everything, of generous 
lovingness  and  forgiveness,  and  of  extreme  inner 
pleasure. This blissful state is important in the under­
standing of the addictions because the inner experi­
ence  is  the  most  impressive  of  all  human  experi­
ences. It represents the experience of what is possible 
within one's Self. 

The experience can also  come out of meditation. 
A person who practices a  meditative  technique  may 
suddenly  go  into  an  expansive  state  of  Infinite 
Oneness and bliss, also  called samadhi,  and become 
aware of what is possible.The knowingness of what is 
possible creates the desire to return to that state. '(he 
person's life usually changes to a considerable degree 

ALCOHOLISM 

411 

as a result of the experience. Many people leave their 
current  lifestyle  and  shift  to  a  totally  different  one 
that is directed towards spiritual purification and the 
removal  of whatever blocks  the  experiencing of the 
state. This  is  also  characteristic  of people  who  have 
near-death experiences, even when they are declared 
dead in the operating room. The movie Revelation is 
about such a person and is clinically very accurate in 
presenting  the  experiencing  of that  infinite  state  of 
blissfulness. Subsequently, there is  a dramatic change 
in  the  person's  lifestyle  that  arises  from  a  different 
knowingness, orientation, and context. 

The classic  movie Lost Horizon depicts the same 
thing· extremely  well  (Ronald  Coleman  was  in  the 
original  version). You  may  remember  that  when  he 
falls  into  Shangri-La  (a  state  of unconditional  loving­
ness that calibrates at about 600), he experiences that 
state of consciousness. When he tries to return to the 
ordinary world, which calibrates around 200, he sees 
a  world  of successful doingness  and  gettingness. He 
cannot find  any  satisfaction in this world any longer 
compared to what he experienced in Shangri-La. This 
created  the  desire  to  return  to  that  state  of  inner 
consciousness at any cost (which the movie depicted 
as a place, but which we know is actually experienced 
within  consciousness).  He  risks  his  life  in  the 
Himalayas because of the drivenness to return to the 
state of Shangri-La. 

We  have  to look  at where  all  human  experience 
occurs. As  we said, the body is  unable  to experience 
itself and is  experienced only in mind. It is  the mind 
that experiences the body. Mind itself is experienced 

412 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

by consciousness; otherwise, it would  not be  aware  . 
of what is  going  on within  mind. The  experience  is 
taking place within an energy field  of consciousness, 
and  it is this inner experience within consciousness 
of  a  blissful  state  that  captures  people  who  have 
never taken drugs. 

Now  we  can  understand  what  happens  in  the 

drug  or  alcohol  experience. This  powerfully  attrac­
tive, joyful energy field,the energy field of life itself, is 
like  the sun that is always  shining. The lower energy 
fields  are  like  the  clouds  that  blank  out  the  experi­
ence of that which is ever shining. A drug or alcohol 
blocks  off the  experience  of the  lower energy fields 
and allows the experience of a higher energy field. If . 
.we  could  block  off all  the  energy fields  below level 
560, we would  experience what is  left, which is  the 
energy field  of Ecstasy. There is even a  designer drug 
called  Ecstasy  created  specifically  to  block  off  the 
experience  of the  energy fields  below 560. With the 
drug  experience,  pharmacologically  something  has 
blocked  off the  lower energy fields  and  allowed  the 
unobstructed experience of a higher one. Thus, at the 
end of the  day,  the  person who  is  full  of fear,  grief, 
regret, and anxiety stops in for two martinis, and sud­
denly temporarily jumps over the lower energy fields 
and moves up to the energy level of about 500, which 
can be called 'mellow' . 

Mellow is  that field  where we sort of love  every­
body and  are  willing  to  forgive  them. We  are  gener­
ous, easygoing, and all  the kids love  us when we  are
 
in that state; we take toys home for the children and
 
flowers for our spouse. This energy state is sought in
 





ALCOHOLISM 

413 

the drug experience because it blocks  off the  lower 
energy levels.As said before, these are addicting expe­
riences  because  the  mind, once  having  experienced 
the state, wants to return to it. 

When we ask the person who has had an alcohol 

or addictive  problem  to  look  at what they are  seek­
ing, to look at the experience that has become habit­
ual and to which they return over and over again no 
matter what the price is, we find that they are seeking 
an inner state of consciousness. In reality, they do not 
even  care  about the drug itself. The  drug is  only the 
mechanics, the only way they know for accessing that 
state  at  the  time. It  is  a  certain way  of experiencing 
their  being, their  existence,  and  it  is  a  pleasurable, 
highly energized state. This is what they seek, and if a 
drug does not block off the lower energy fields, there­
by  preventing  them  from  experiencing  that  inner 
state of blissfulness, then the drug is no longer used 
or  valued. We  can  see  that  the  addiction  is  not  to 
drugs  or 'alcohol  per  se  but  to  the  'high'  state  of 
consciousness itself. 

Many  of the psychological  explanations of addic­
tion try to present it as though the person is  running 
away  from  the  lower  experience  of fear  or  depres­
sion. There are some excellent drugs that will handle 
that;  for  example, Thorazene  eliminates  anxiety  but 
does not result in addiction as there is  no 'high'. The 
same  is  true with  antidepressants. An  antidepressant 
will  move  one  out  of the  depression,  but  does  not 
result in a 'high'. Therefore, the  alleviation of depres­
sion, anxiety, fear, or anger, is well handled pharmaco­
logically by traditional medical drugs that are not con­

414 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

sidered  to  be  addictive  substances  because  they  do 
not block off the energy fields  at a  sufficient level to 
allow people to experience the higher state. 

We  can  see  that  the  person  is  addicted  to  the 
energy  field  within,  to  that  state  of  consciousness, 
which creates the desire to return 'to it. They are will~ 
ing  to  pay  the  price  because  the  mind  begins  to 
demand  a  return to  that experience, no matter what 
the cost.The willingness to pay increases with time so 
that finally, in the end, it will ask for the body itself. It 
will  say,  "If you  keep  on  drinking  like  that,  you  are 
going to be dead within weeks or months."You know 
what the person does about that-they go across the 
street to the bartender, their old pal Joe, order a mar­
tini and say, "Guess what the doctor told me today?"At 
that point, the  bartender orders  him  a  drink for  the 
good old times, and they kiss  the body goodbye. The 
willingness to let all of it go is  absent, and we see the 
price that people are willing  to pay for the  so-called 
addiction  to  this  state  of consciousness.  It mystifies 
people  who  have  not  accessed  that  level  of  con­
sciousness in their drug experience.These people are 
willing to sacrifice  all  of it in order to return to this 
energy field that we call Bliss-the inner Shangri-La. 

We  see the same thing going on with people who 
have never taken a drug. By virtue of their destiny or 
previous  spiritual  work,  they  have  risen  into  the 
energy fields of these higher experiences, and they do 
the same thing. They have the willingness to give  up 
power, money, position,  and  titles  in  the  world, and 
they devote all  their time and energy to returning to 
this state of consciousness. The movie, Lost Horizon, 

ALCOHOLISM 

415 

really tells us the story of the motive  of addiction by 
showing  the  willingness  to  sacrifice  all  of life  for  a 
certain state of consciousness. 

There  is  an  innate  inner  awareness  of what  is 

really true, and addiction is a false  start to experienc­
ing the truth because it does not work. Thus, the rea­
son  for  giving  up  the  addiction, alcohol, or drugs  is 
not because it is wrong but because it does not work 
anymore. It does not work because through drugs and 
alcohol  comes  the  progressive  loss  of  inner  self­
respect, along with the adversities and negativities of 
these  energy fields. It is  the  beginning of experienc­
ing very negative events in one's life.There can be the 
beginning  of the  loss  of relationships, credit 'cards, 
status,  physical  health,  and  functioning  of  body 
organs, which signifies  the downhill  course  brought 
about  by  the  denial  of the  truth. The  denial  of the 
truth from  level  200  on  down is  due  to  putting  the 
power  outside  oneself. In  addiction,  the  person  has 
given  away  the  source  of their happiness  and  mean­
ing in life  by projecting it onto  the  outer world and 
giving that power to the drug or alcohol, to some sub­
stance outside themselves. 

The  drug  in  and  of itself has  no  power at  all  to 
tested  and 
create  the  higher  experiences.  We 
researched this for many years with literally hundreds 
of people clinically and in the classes we gave for peo­
ple who were fighting  or right in the middle of han­
dling  their  addictive  problem.  Using  the  diagnostic 
method of discerning truth from falsehood, we tested 
the  proposition  that  "The  drug  has  the  power  to 
create  this  higher  experience,"  and  universally,  one 

416 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

hundred percent of the people went weak with that 
statement,  proving  that  it  is  a  lie. The  drug  has  no 
power whatsoever. Then we presented them with an 
opposite concept and had everybody in the class hold 
in  mind  the  thought  that "The  drug  blocks  off the 
energy fields  that  are  coming from  the  ego  self and 
allows me to experience the joyfulness of that which 
is my real Self." Instantly, everybody in the class went 
strong, indicating that the statement is true. 

The truth is  that the  drug has  no power whatso­
ever to create these experiences, but it does have the 
pharmacological  capacity  to  block  off the  negative 
energy fields,  allowing  a  person to  at  least  get  into 
the ballpark. Of course, it is  not the real state of Bliss 
that is experienced by the person who has earned it 
through their own progressive  spiritual work, but at 
least it is similar to that experience. Feeling the energy 
that is  closer to the truth of one's own being allows 
us  to  utilize  this  knowledge  now  in  understanding 
recovery from addictions. 

When a  person seeks treatment for an addiction, 
they  are  usually  at  the  bottom  of  the  Map  of 
Consciousness  and  filled  with  self-hatred,  hopeless­
ness,  despair,  regret,  and  despondency. The  energy 
field  of  apathy,  hopelessness,  and  despair  is  one  in 
which the person cannot help themselves. Hopeless 
means just that. For example, the president of a county 
bar association literally died of starvation while living 
alone in a rooming house. He was addicted to a com­
bination  of Valium  and  alcohol. He  never picked  up 
the phone to call  anybody for help. A person of that 
caliber  has  many  friends,  all  of whom  would  have 

ALCOHOLISM 

417 

dropped everything to help him, but he· felt there was 
no point in making the phone call because there was 
no  hope. That hopelessness  of one's  condition  often 
expresses itself as "My case is different; my case is dif­
ferent," meaning "You may well recover from this, but 
my case is hopeless." 

Out of this apathy and hopelessness in which God 
is dead for the person, all we can do is pour energy into 
them.The process going on in consciousness is that of 
the  loss  of energy. The  person is  de-energized, as  was 
the  woman who  was  rocking  back  and  forth  in  her 
rocking  chair, staring blankly out the window. Reason 
has no effect. We  saw that when the telegram arrived 
from  the  Department of Defense  saying  the  death  of 
her son was a mistake. Her energy field did not change. 
She  kept right  on rocking back and forth, staring  out 
the  window. The  answer is  to pour energy into  that 
person through our concern, lovingness, physical pres­
ence,  nutrition,  and  every  possible  way  in  order  to 
move them up to the next energy field  of Grief. 

Grief has to do with the past, and when the person 
comes out of a blank, shock-like state, they begin to 
cry  and  regret  the  loss  that  all  the  addiction  has 
cost  them. There  is  regret, along  with  a  feeling  of 
self-pity  and  sorrow for  the  fact  that they are  in  a 
rehabilitation facility  or in the space they are  in life. 
They  are  sad  about life  and  their addiction  and  feel 
completely neglected by God. 

At this level there is regret about the past, so we 
move the person's energy field up to the next level, 
which is one of Fear. At this point, the person begins 
to  fear  the  addiction,  aided  by  worry  and  anxiety. 

418 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

Fear  has  to  do  with  the  future. The  person  is  no 
longer in an inflated state of denial; on the contrary, 
they  are  deflated. The  world  looks  frightening,  and 
they may feel  that  God  is  punishing  them for  their 
past  sins. They misinterpret  the  addiction  as  a  pun­
ishment and fear more punishment and further loss 
in the future. But the energy of each thing can move 
one up to the energy of the next. The person moves 
out of fear of the addiction into the  desire for  some­
thing  better  than  being  a  victim  or  wanting  and 
craving. This moves them up to Anger. 

Anger  has  a  lot  of  useful  energy  in  it,  not  the 
form of anger itself but the energy of anger in which 
the person becomes angry over their predicament in 
life and being the victim. This anger can be used in a 
constructive  way  as  a  turning  point  away  from 
defeatism.  Better  than  hopelessness  is  the  pride  in 
doing something about it by taking action and begin­
ning  to  move  up  into  caring  for  oneself and  one's 
position,  and  then  moving  up  to  the  next. energy 
field  of Courage. 

The  courage  to  tell  the  truth  is  crucial  in  the 
addictions. We  see the powerful effect of the first  of 
the  twelve  steps  in AA-the  admission  that  one  is 
powerless over alcohol or drugs-which now allows 
for  the  capacity to  face, cope, handle, and be appro­
priate.  It  represents  re-empowerment; The  world  is 
then  seen  as  an  opportunity,  and  for  the  first  time, 
there  is  the  benefit  of an  open mind, and  the  truth 
now has a way to enter the mind. Pride can be utilized 
to  move  the  person up  into  Courage  and  to  look  at 
the facts. Doing so  provides encouragement to move 

ALCOHOLISM 

419 

up to the next position, that of letting go of resisting 
the  facts  and  being  released  from  that  resistance  in 
order  to  begin  to  view  the  world  as  an  okay  place. 
This  allows  one to utilize  and experience inner free­
dom  to  explore,  expand,  and  then  move  up  to  the 
willingness  to  say  yes,  join  in  the  exploration,  and 
agree  to align with it. The  person thus  develops  the 
capacity to see  the whole rehabilitative process in a 
world that is friendly. 

Alcoholics Anonymous  and  other  recovery  pro­
grams  are  then  viewed  as  promising  and  hopeful, 
and the person feels  that perhaps they will recover. 
Acceptance  is  a  very  powerful  energy  field  where 
one  realizes  the  power  to  make  these  decisions. 
Confidence,  a  feeling  of  adequacy,  and  transforma­
tion  occur  through  experiencing  that  the  world  is 
harmonious. On the  one hand, it  has  presented the 
person with a problem, but on the other hand, it has 
also  provided  the  answer. That  which is  a  merciful 
God  proVides  the  solutions,  so  although  one  may 
have  an  addiction,there are  hundreds  of thousands 
of people  around who  have  found  the  answers and 
are only too willing to be helpful. 

With surrender, the world begins to look friendly, 
harmonious,  merciful,  helpful,  and  hopeful,  and  it 
offers  acceptance. With  the  letting  go  of the  resist­
ance  and  denial,  an  energy  field  of  lovingness 
emerges. The person then commits to an energy field 
that  is  healing  by  joining  one  of  the  twelve-step 
groups  whose  energy  is  innately  healing.  (AA  cali­
brates at 540.) The person's willingness to align with 
it and  accept  the  healing  is  essential. Through  that 

420 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

willingness  then  comes  acceptance. The  truth  about 
this is accepting the necessity to be in an energy field 
that  is  nurturing,  supportive,  understanding,  and 
unconditionally  loving.  In  that  field,  people  know 
they are  in a  safe  space. To  remain aligned with that 
ensures their survival. With that experience come the 
joyfulness  and  the  beginning  of  experiencing  an 
inner serenity and seeing the perfection and oneness 
of the  energy field  of which one is  now an integral 
part. It is  the willingness to tell the truth that moves 
one up through this very critical level. 

The  ftrst  step  of the  twelve-step  program  is  the 
willingness  to  admit the  truth that one is  powerless 
over alcohol  or drugs  and  that  alcohol  or drugs  are 
making  one's  life  unmanageable.  The  second  step 
then becomes very signillcant in that the 'restoring us 
to sanity' is by a  power greater than oneself. Thereby 
does the ego surrender to God (as the self surrenders 
to the power of the Self). 

We  look at  joy and bliss  and  see  that  the  energy 
field  starts  at  about  500  and  runs  all  the  way  up  to 
600.  That  fteld  is  like  a  powerful  electromagnet 
pulling  one  back into wanting  to  re-experience  that 
experience in consciousness. Therefore, to handle it, 
something  with  equal  power  will  be  needed  to 
replace  it.  The  second  step  is  really  the  intuitive 
knowing that something greater than the  ego  or the 
limited small self is going to be needed to handle the 
attraction of such a powerful energy fteld. 

The  third  step  is  the  decision  that  comes  out  of 
that,  which  is  the  surrendering  and  willingness  to 
turn one's life  over to God, as  one understands Him. 

ALCOHOLISM 

421 

Out of willingness itself, the God of one's own under­
standing  is  already  a  friend-a  promising,  merciful, 
and  responsive  God. The  willingness  to  be  trusting 
sources the element of faith, so the third step of deep 
surrender really  moves  one  into  alignment  with  the 
energy field  of 540 and above. The rest of the twelve 
steps  now  makes  sense  from  the  viewpoint  of the 
levels of consciousness as we have looked at them. 
The fourth step says to honestly look within one­
self to discover any defects of character and to take a 
fearless moral inventory, which entails the willingness 
to look at and own all that was negative in one's life. 
Then follows the fifth step, a very healing step by 
which  to· admit  to  oneself,  to  God,  and  to  another 
human being the  exact nature  of one's wrongs. That 
step changes the energy field  and removes the nega­
tive  charge  from  it. Taking  off the  negativity has  not 
changed  the  history,  but  the  way  it  is  held  has 
changed,  making  inoperative  that  which  previously 
had the  capacity to  corrode and destroy. Bill Wilson, 
the founder ofAA, used to say that the correct attitude 
about the past is a decent regret, which is quite differ­
ent  from  self-hatred,  shame,  or  wallowing  in  guilt. 
Instead, one then comes from  the heart. Bill  used to 
say that AA  is the language of the heart and from the 
heart, which heals with its  humor, acceptance, light­
ness, and willingness to heal the past. 

The healing then proceeds out of step five  and is 
expressed  in  restitution  in  steps  six  through  nine, 
which are  really the  reparative  steps. In those  steps, 
the  person  takes  responsibility  to  actually  do  some­
thing  in  the  world  to  repair  any  damage  that  is 

422 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

repairable  and  to  mend  whatever  fences  can  be 
mended so it is not just a mental intellectual exercise. 
It becomes real and relieves the guilt about what one 
has done in the past. To  the best of one's ability, one 
goes back into the world and tries to repair the dam­
ages that have been done to the degree that they are 
repairable. 

Step  ten  then  says  that  taking  responsibility  for . 

the  content of one's  own consciousness  and having 
the willingness to clean it up then becomes a way of 
life on a daily basis.The daily inventory makes note of 
what was lacking in· integrity, where  one could have 
done  better,  and  where  one  could  have  been  more 
loving.  Step  ten  is  owning  responsibility  for  the 
process of spiritual progress and committing to it as a 
way of life. 

Step eleven is interesting because it says if one has 
thoroughly  done  steps  one  through  ten,  one  will 
reconnect with something that was sought in the first 
place  through  drugs  and  alcohol. It says  that prayer 
and  meditation  will  increase  consciousness  contact 
with God as He is understood, asking only for knowl­
edge of His will and the power to carry it out. 

Step  eleven  does not say, "We  begin"; it  says  that 
conscious  contact  has  already  happened.  It  occurs 
through  internal  surrender and  honest  commitment 
to  lovingness  and  Self  as  a  lifestyle.  One  connects 
with  God  through  the  heart  because  that  which  is 
Divine, that which is God, and that which is love  are 
all the same thing. By commitment to lovingness as a 
lifestyle, as a way of being in the world to the best of 
our ability, we  reconnect with some  rock-like, joyful 

ALCOHOLISM 

423 

inner experience that was similar to what we sought 
through alcohol and drugs in the first place. 

Step  twelve  reveals  what  the  whole  addictive 
process is  about and what its nature is  in the field of 
consciousness.  Step  twelve  says  that  having  had  a 
spiritual  awakening  as  a  result  of  the  steps  and 
becoming conscious is a result of the entire addictive 
experience. One  now has  the  capacity  to  carry this 
message  to  others and express it in one's  entire  life. 
The  twelfth  step  tells  us  that  the  whole  purpose  of 
the addictive process was to. awaken us and move us 
up from  one level of consciousness to another; to go 
from  being asleep and unaware to being awake, con­
scious,  aware,  and  responsible;  to  move  from  being 
unconscious, irresponsible, and the helpless victim to 
owning ourselves as being spiritually responsible for 
the happiness within our life. 

This  precludes  putting  the  source  of happiness 
outside  of  oneself.  Instead,  one  realizes  that  the 
source of happiness is  the same as the  source of life 
and comes from responsibly owning oneself as a spir­
itually aware person. 

There is now a different context within which to 
hold  the  whole  addictive  process  of movement,  of 
increasing  consciousness  and  awareness,  so  that 
alcoholism  and  drugs  then  require  a  person  to 
become  more  awake  in  order  to  survive. These  dis­
eases  are  progressively  fatal,  and  the  only  way  to 
recover from them is to become progressively spiritu­
ally aware and more conscious. Life  itself depends on 
becoming conscious via major self-confrontation with 
something  that  the  higher  Self has  picked  that  will 

424 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

force  one to grow because there is  no turning back. 
The only options are to surrender one's will to God or 
go  insane  and die. There is  no reprogramming of the 
brain  cells  once  they  are  programmed. There  is  not 
enough  room  on  the  tightrope  to  turn  around  and 
change  one'.s  mind.  Once  one  is  into  the  addictive 
alcoholic  process, there  is  no  turning  back. There  is 
only confrontation with owning the truth about one's 
self.  Recovery  depends  on  accepting  that  process, 
moving joyfully into it, and being grateful. 

Now  it  is  understandable  why  speakers  at  AA 

meetings  say  they  are  grateful  that  they  are  alco­
holics. To the newcomer, this indeed sounds like mad­
ness.  Grateful?  How  could  one  be  grateful  that  one 
has  become  addicted  or  an  alcoholic?  Because  that 
forced  one to grow and become conscious. It forced 
one  to  become  aware  and  therefore  grateful  for  the 
process. At  first  one  resents  and  resists  it,  but then 
one  actually accepts  and agrees with it. One begins 
to love  and experience joy and finally  achieves  that 
state called serenity. 

There is  an inner knowingness that this was one's 
destiny-the  way  of doing  it,  and  the  way  that  was 
chosen-which  results  in  the  awareness  that  one 
never could have reached this great understanding by 
any other way. Some people just have to experience it 
this way. The ego has to hit bottom in order surrender 
and find God. For those who do, great gratitude comes 
about,  along  with  a  greater  understanding  of  the 
nature  of consciousness  itself. Those  who  surrender 
to God receive the gifts of God. 

CHAPTER  14 

Cancer 

Thus far, we have been talking about the utilization of 
basic 
laws  of  mind  and  consciousness  when 
approaching  illnesses  such  as  heart  disease,  depres­
sion, alcoholism, and drug  addiction. All  of these  are 
serious confrontations that require  us  to change our 
view of reality and what it really is. This  information 
is  addressed especially to patients with cancer, fami­
lies  of  people  with  cancer,  people  who  fear  they 
might have cancer, and people who are in treatment 
with cancer. 

We will present a holistic approach to healing and 
again will be talking about body, mind, and spirit. We 
are not saying that the treatment has to be a traditional 
one  or  an  alternate  one,  but  we  are  saying  that  it 
should include both because true healing requires the 
larger  dimension,  which  includes  physical,  mental, 
and  spiritual  aspects,  with  due  regard  for  inherent 
human limitation. 

All the patients or people I have known who have 
recovered  from  these  chronic, very  serious  diseases 
(many of whom were given up as  hopeless  by their 
physicians and the medical community) have done so 
by  exploring  the  greater  defmition  of the  truth  of 
reality of that which they are, and by exploring that 
realm of human knowledge called 'spiritual'. 

What is  that relationship between body, mind, and 
spirit? It is not just a catch phrase but something real 
we  can  work  with  in  everyday  life  and  see  actual 
results.  Those  friends  walking  around  who  have 
recovered from  all  these fatal  illnesses  are living evi­

425 

426 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

dence  that we  can  recover from  just  about  any  dis­
ease known to mankind. 

As  shared in earlier chapters, I have had a number 
of chronic, intractable  illnesses. Although  they  were 
treatable (some of the symptoms were handled), the 
diseases did not improve. In fact, they got progressively 
worse.  Despite  traditional  medical  treatment,  I  was 
merely holding the line on a few and losing it on several 
others. It was through exploring the greater dimension 
and the field called consciousness and how they related 
to  self-healing  that  recovery from  all  these  illnesses 
occurred. 

Once  time  I  had  gout  and  a  high  uric  acid  level. 
After I learned that the body only does what is held in 
mind  and  began  to  change  what  I  was  holding  in 
mind,  then  the  body's  chemistry  literally  began  to 
change.  I  learned  that  all  the  atoms,  cells,  elements, 
electrons, and all of which the body is made are influ­
enced  by  consciousness. This  understanding  is  very 
important in the approaches we use in the treatment 
of cancer. 

The relationship between body, mind, and spirit is 
that the body reflects what is  held in mind, which in 
turn reflects one's spiritual position. It is necessary to 
know  where  all  human  experience  takes  place 
because if we  address  that level, we will be address­
ing the most powerful level. If the physical is the con­
sequence of the mental, and the mental is  the conse­
quence of the spiritual, then we need to address it in 
the  area  called consciousness. Clinically,  this  is  true. 
People  who  address  the level of consciousness itself 
may even witness transformation in their bodies with­

CANCER 

427 

out even having to address the body directly with any 
medical approach.. 

We  need  to  know  where  experience  is  experi­
enced  and  let  go  of some  of the  common  illusions 
that people hold in mind because they just have not 
looked  into  the  matter.  We  will  repeat  the  basic 
process: The body itself is  incapable  of experiencing 
itself.  For  example,  our  hands  cannot  experience 
themselves, their existence, their position in space, or 
even sensations. They have no capacity to do so. This 
is  because  of  something  greater  than  the  physical 
body, which we call mind.All the physical things that 
go on with the body, including sensations, are experi­
enced  in  the  greater  dimension  called  mind. It  is  in 
mind that the experience of the body takes place. 

Curiously  enough,  however,  the  mind  itself  has 
no capacity to experience itself. A thought is  just an 
energy  form  and  has  no  capacity  to  experience  its 
own thoughtness.A feeling has no capacity to experi­
ence its  own feelingness, and an emotion cannot be 
experienced  other  than via  mind  itself.  In  turn, it  is 
held within an energy field that is greater than mind, 
that of consciousness itself, which has no dimension, 
limitation, or form. 

Because  of consciousness, we  are  aware  of what 

goes on in mind. Even consciousness itself is  not suf­
ficient. Within the  energy field  of consciousness  is  a 
very  high  frequency  of vibration, analogous to light 
itself,  called  awareness.  Out  of  awareness  arises  a 
knowingness  of what is  going  on within  conscious­
ness, which reports what is going on within mind, and 
it, in turn, reports what is going on with the physical 

428 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

body. We  can see that the physical body itself is sev­
erallevels removed from that which is the most real 
and  therefore  the  most  powerful. We  find  that  the 
energy  of  thought  is  far  more  powerful  than  the 
energy levels of the physical body. 

In previous chapters, we have described a number 
of techniques  that  can  bring  about  self-healing.  In 
discussing the nature of consciousness itself, we will 
create a context for ourselves so that the self-healing 
modalities  to be  described later will  begin to  make 
sense. 

First, we  need to learn how to hold  and think of 
the  experience  of  having  a  life-threatening  illness 
such as  cancer. There are two ways to go about it. We 
can go up or we can go down.Any kind of confronta­
tion, such as a death in the family, any kind of serious 
illness,  or  a  setback  in  a  person's  life  presents  a 
choice. We  can  go  down  into  feeling  sorry  for  our­
selves  as  a  victim. We  can  go  down  into  self-pity, 
depression,  and  despair,  or we  can  see  it  as  a  chal­
lenge and an opportunity. 

These  confrontations  come  up  repeatedly in  our 
lives  until we seize  the  opportunity and realize  they 
are a springboard to greater awareness.Why is this so? 
It is  because the ordinary  events  in life  do not have 
the power or the energy. It takes maximum duress for 
people to  stop in their tracks and begin to question 
the realities of all the things they have believed up to 
this point. The mind ordinarily will not undertake the 
expenditure of energy to reorient itself to get a new, 
different  point  of view  about life  and what it yields 
unless it has to.As a result, this necessary growth will 

CANCER 

429 

usually only happen when we are up against a  major 
confrontation. 

The  first  thing  to  understand  about  cancer  or 
other serious illness is that the purpose of this major 
confrontation  is  for  us  to  grow and  grow  rapidly  as 
fast  as  we can because we have  a  certain time  limit 
with terminal illnesses. Things that the mind says are 
fatal or terminal become fatal and terminal because of 
the power of the mind. If the mind thinks an illness is 
fatal  and terminal, it will  be  so, subject, however, to 
karmic destiny.This illustrates the power of belief sys­
tems. 

The most important message is  that no one needs 
to succumb to or be the victim of any illness. I count 
among my friends many people who have conquered 
nearly  every illness  known  to  mankind  thus  far. The 
only  reason  I  can  write  of  these  things  today  is 
because I myself did exactly the same thing in my per­
sonallife. If I  had not, I would have  hemorrhaged to 
death  from  a  variety  of illnesses,  all  of which  went 
into remission. 

The  perfection that is  held in  mind then reflects 
itself in the progressive perfection of the body and its 
letting go of disease. We  have  to understand that the 
body itself expresses what is held in consciousness. It 
is merely an expression of the mind and a reflector of 
what we hold consciously or unconsciously. A person 
may  look  back  in  his  mind  and  say,  "Well,  I  don't 
remember thinking  about  such a  thing." If one  does 
not remember thinking about something, all  one has 
to  do  is  look to  see  if it is  in  one's  life.  It may  have 
originated  from  the  collective  consciousness  of 

430 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

mankind  or may  have  been  silently  programmed  by 
even a television advertisement. 

To help create a different context and way of look­
ing at life  and experience, we will  again refer to the 
Map  of  Consciousness  from  which  we  can  under­
stand  all  the  principles  of self-healing. At  tWs  point, 
we may realize  that we are  not the same person we 
were when we saw the Map for the first  time. Every 
time we go over it, it is  sort of like 'freight-train learn­
ing'. We  learn  it  through familiarity. The  left  brain  is 
linear and  logical  and  learns  things  sequentially in  a 
piecemeal fashion. The right brain circles over a situa­
tion, and by shear repetitious exposure and familiarity 
basically understands the whole thing. 

We are going to be discussing phenomena that are 
in the  subconscious, somewhere in the periphery of 
the mind, phenomena that we actually already know 
about. We  are  going  to  pull  them  together  and  syn­
chronize them in a useful way. 

Referring  to  the  Map  of Consciousness, it  repre­
sents the human ego, the self with a small's' that peo­
ple refer to when they say,"I,""me," or "myself."The self 
is  that collection of concepts, impressions, opinions, 
feelings  (conscious  and  unconscious), the  totality  of 
what makes up what a person sees when they say, "I," 
"me," or "myself." 

Shown on the Map are various levels of energy, or 
consciousness, starting  at the very lowest  and going 
up to the very highest. They have  all been calibrated 
through the research we have done.We first found the 
direction of the energy field. The fields from Courage 
and  below  go  downward,  indicating  that  they  are 

CANCER 

431 

destructive and do not support life. 

The  levels  from  Courage  on  up  show  that  the 
energy goes upward. Love is near the top of the scale 
and, in  contrast, Guilt  and  self-hatred  are  at  the  bot­
tom.  Understanding  the  energy  fields,  their  relative 
powers,  and  whether  they  are  constructive  or 
destructive, is  very  helpful. For  example, in  medical 
treatment, we  hold  the  medication  in  our hand  and 
have  someone test our muscle  strength to  see if the 
medication is good for  us or not. If the medication is 
not beneficial, our arm will go weak; if it is  good for 
us, our arm will go strong. This is a way to find out if 
a recommended treatment will be helpful. 

It is  necessary  to  learn  about  the  energy  fields 
because they are infmitely related to cancer and cancer 
research.  All  are  extremely  important  because  the 
body, mind, and  spirit  are  all  actually  expressions  of 
consciousness. Therefore,  if  it  is  a  negative  energy 
field,  it is  destructive  to  all  aspects  of oneself, right 
down  to  the  biochemical level. All  we  have  to  do is 
look  at  the  Map  to  see  what  emotion is  involved  in 
order to know what our energy field is. In looking at 
self-pity, for example, we can see that we are  now in 
a  negative energy field that calibrates at 50, which is 
very weak compared to Love at 500. 

We  can see  that it is  very important to  let  goof 
negative  energy and negative  thoughts. The  negative 
energy of the feeling or thought transmits itself to the 
body's  acupuncture  energy  system  through  the 
twelve meridians and translates itself directly into the 
body's organs and cells. If we hate someone, the cells 
of  the  body  get  the  energy  of hate. Anger  has  the 

432 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

capacity to  change  the  energy field  within the  body 
itself as well as the power to actually change the phys­
iological programming within the body. 

The mind has enormous power over every aspect 
of the  body's  functions,  right  down  to  the  smallest 
molecule and atom. It has been discovered that every 
atom  and  every  molecule  within  the  body  is  influ­
enced  by  consciousness  levels  and  beliefs.  Every 
physiological  and  chemical  transaction  that  goes  on 
in  the  body  is  the  result  of a  blueprint  of it within 
consciousness. All  of them can be changed by chang­
ing consciousness. 

The placebo response  is  illustrative  of the power 
of  mind  over  body.  Research  over  the  decades  has 
that  approximately  one-third  of 
demonstrated 
patients  will  improve  or recover when  they  believe 
that a particular pill is curative. That is why many really 
inert  nostrums  (questionable  remedies)  continue  to 
be sold to the public because at least approximately 
thirty-three percent of the people will give testimony 
to  experiential  benefit. Also  easily  observed  is  the 
'nocebo' effect whereby a  negative belief system can 
result  in  ill  effects. That  is  the  mechanism  whereby 
about  one-third  of patients  may  report  side  effects 
from  the  same  medication  from  which  the  positive 
responders report good effects. Plain  sugar pills will 
result in many claims that they resulted in headache, 
nausea, indigestion, dizziness, insomnia, somnolence, 
and more.Then there is the one-third of patients who 
are  refractory  and  report  neither  benefits  nor  side 
effects. Thus  arises  the  old adage  in  clinical practice 
that one third gets well, one-third gets worse, and one­

CANCER 

433 

third stays the same no matter what the doctor does. 
As  mentioned elsewhere, the power of belief is  most 
dramatically  demonstrated  with  hypnosis  by  which 
illnesses  or  symptoms  can  easily  be  brought  about 
merely by suggestion. 

The information presented is shared not only from 
clinical  experience  but  also  from  the  experience  of 
friends and associates, as well as personal experience 
with  my  own  physical  health.  I  watched  my  body 
chemistry literally change as  I  began to change what 
I was holding about it within my mind and conscious­
ness. The basic principle essential to healing from all 
illnesses, no matter what they are, is  that we are pri­
marily only subject to  what we hold in mind. 

It is  the mind's belief systems  that give  power to 
that  which  subsequently  manife~ts  in  the  physical 
world. The physical body is an expression of what we 
have  inherited  plus  what  we  ha~e  been  holding  in 
mind, either consciously or unconsciously. People will 
often  say  they  do  not  remember  holding  such  a 
thought; however, there  is  what Dr.  Carl Jung  called 
the 'collective  consciousness' that holds  the  thought 
form. Unconsciously we buy into it and give energy to 
a negative belief system without ever remembering it 
or being consciously aware of it (e.g., via the media). 
With  cancer,  much  emotional  energy  has  been 
given to it by the popular mind-all the fear associated 
with  it,  all  the  negative  connotations,  and  all  the 
thought forms. Therefore, we hold fear itself, which is 
a  negative  energy  field.  If we  are  holding  a  lot  of 
unconscious fear, it now opens the door to bring into 
our mind unconsciously those things that are fearful, 

434 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

including  cancer. Without  ever  having  believed  that 
we are susceptible to cancer, we may discover, as it is 
occurring within the body, that we  have  unWittingly 
bought into  this  collective  belief system in terms  of 
thought forms. 

In  looking further  at  these  energy fields, we  can 
see that the energy field called Guilt is  at the bottom 
of the Map and calibrates at 30.The emotion that goes 
with  Guilt  is  that  of  self-hatred.  A  great  deal  of 
research  into  the  psychological  and  psychosomatic 
importance of cancer has revealed that there is often 
a  good  deal  of unconscious  self-hatred, self-condem­
nation, and lack of acceptance of one's humanness at 
a deep level. 

There is a difference between treating, curing, and 

healing. It is  possible to treat an illness  and its  symp­
toms in order to bring about an  amelioration, or the 
capacity to live  with the illness. As  mentioned previ­
ously, for many years I  had migraine  headaches, duo­
denal  ulcers,  gout,  hypoglycemia,  circulatory  prob­
lems, Raynaud's disease, Grave's disease, diverticulitis, 
and more, as  described elsewhere. All  these  illnesses 
came  about as  the  result of belief §ystems  and were 
also  accompanied  to  some  degree  by  unconscious 
guilt. We have found that unconscious guilt accompa­
nies all illnesses, no matter what they may be. 

If we have a physical illness, we can just presume 
correctly that there is  unconscious guilt. Without the 
unconscious guilt, the disease cannot actually be pres­
ent because  that which is  destructive  and  accompa­
nied  by  self-hatred  can  operate  only  in  a  negative 
energy field. That is  the secret of healing. 

CANCER 

435 

An analogy is that certain bacteria will only grow 
in a culture medium under certain conditions, such as 
a  specific temperature, a certain amount of light, and 
ambient  conditions.  If the  conditions  are  changed, 
then  the  bacteria  cannot  live  in  the  petri  dish  any 
longer  and  will  disappear. Therefore,  that  which  is 
destructive  and which the unconscious needs for its 
process  of destruction  can  continue  only  in  a  nega­
tive  energy field  that  allows  the  negative  energy  of 
destruction to take place. That is a clue to healing. 

In nature, the rotation of an energy field is decisive. 
For  example, with  a  drug,  the  chemical  effect  of a 
molecule is dependent on whether it spins to the right 
or to the left.We will use dextroamphetamine sulfate as 
an example, 'dextro', meaning 'to the right' .This drug is 
so-called 'speed', with the effect of weight loss, the feel­
ing of high excitability, grinding one's teeth, and finally, 
manic  attacks.  Levoamphetamine  ('levo',  meaning  'to 
the left') sulfate has no such effect whatsoever. It is the 
same  molecule,  but  the  rotation  is  in  the  opposite 
direction. 

Obviously, all we need to do to heal ourselves is to 
move  from  the  negative  energy field  into  a  positive 
one.  Self-healing  is  really  so  simple.  It  amounts  to 
changing  the  predominant  energy  field  within  our 
consciousness from negative to positive.The question 
then arises, how do we do that? 

Now  that  we  are  aware  of the  physics,  science, 
metaphysics, and emotional truth of it, along with the 
medical, psychiatric, and holistic viewpoints, we  can 
understand why we should let go of these emotions. 
It is not for the purpose of becoming a 'goody goody' 

436 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

person, but because  hanging  on to  them is  potentially 
destructive or even lethal. 

We  have  previously  mentioned  the  muscle­
strength  testing  method. With  this  process, we  can 
test  somebody's  strength,  which  shows  that  when 
they hold negative  thoughts  in mind, they go weak. 
When they go weak, it means there is an impairment 
of the acupuncture system, which is connected to the 
various  body  organs. There  are  also  changes  in  the 
chemical and reproductive patterns of the cells. 

The only opportunity to heal anything is to move 
out of the  negative  energy field  into  a  positive  one. 
The  power  of the  healing  increases  with  a  higher, 
more positive energy. That is why holistic approaches 
have  worked  where  medical  science  has  not  been 
able  to  effect  a  cure. Without  having  the  benefit  of 
this knowledge, I would have died many years ago of 
a fatal digestive disease that reversed itself right at the 
point of death. It is essential to understand that letting 
go of guilt is crucial to the recovery from any serious 
disease,  especially  cancer,  where  guilt,  lack  of  self­
esteem, and the presence of self~hatred and fear have 
such an overriding influence. 

The next energy field above this (which is accom­
panied by hopelessness and despair) is  called Apathy, 
in the energy field of 50. One has a hopeless view of 
the world at this level and allows oneself to be over­
taken  by self-pity  and  hopelessness. One  becomes  a 
victim of the energy field that favors a progression of 
the cancer. 

The field above that is Grief. When people fIrst get 
a diagnosis, especially if they are younger people, they 

CANCER 

437 

will naturally ask, "Why me?"They go into regret and 
a feeling  of loss and despondency. The world and life 
now begin to look sad, and they become the victim of 
this  energy field. 'Energy field' is  repeated because it 
is important to see one's own innocence in this matter. 
It  is  because  of this  innocence  that  we  allow  our­
selves to be run by this energy field. 

The  stage  above  Grief is  Fear, which  is  also  very 
prevalent in patients who develop cancer. Fear, with a 
very  negative  energy,  has  more  power  now  in  an 
energy field of 100.The world and life look frighten­
ing from this field, and God begins to look punitive. 
What kind of God would give us cancer? The process 
of  life  itself  begins  to  feel  deflated.  A  person  is 
tempted to become dispirited, de-energized, to give 
in  to  the  destructiveness,  and  unconsciously  allow 
the disease to progress. 

We  have  a  choice  to  desire  something better for 
ourselves  than  being victims. All  the  people  I  know 
who  recovered  from  serious  illnesses  did  not  settle 
for being victims. They all  began to desire something 
better for  themselves. They thought there  must be  a 
better way, so they began to research and look outside 
the  traditional  medical  model.  They  began  to  say, 
"Well, Doctor, is that all you have to offer? It is going 
to take more than that to heal it." 

Out of their desire and anger, they began to ask, "Is 
there  something  else  that  can  heal  me?" This  shows 
that the energy fields  of these emotions can be used 
in a constructive way. The answer to their question is, 
of course, "Yes." They  begin  to  take  pride  and  now 
move  up  to  a  very  decisive  point  called  Courage, 

438 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

which  is  in  the  energy  field  of  200  and  has  many 
times  more  energy  than  Fear.  More  importantly, the 
direction of the energy field  has changed from nega­
tive to neutral. 

The  energy field  that  surrounds the human body 

is  like  an antenna, and when it is  tuned to the nega­
tive, it  draws  to  itself that which  is  destructive. The 
body, being right in the way of that destructive energy 
field,  gets  hit  by  it.  Because  of  the  negativity  and 
destruction  hitting  the  body  and  expressing  itself 
through  the body, in this case  as  cancer, we become 
aware of the fact that some error is involved. It occurs 
to  us  to  start looking to see where it is.  Perhaps the 
error is in the way we have been holding life and our 
belief systems, and in the way we think about ourself. 
At the level of Courage, we begin to have an open 
mind. Our view of the world begins to change, and we 
move  up to a  world of opportunity where the doors 
start to open. Before this, the mind is closed. It thinks 
it knows the  answer, but once we have the  courage, 
the  mind  begins  to  open  and  say,  'TIl bet there  are 
answers I don't even know about. In fact, I don't even 
know  the  right  questions  to  ask."  The  minute  we 
begin to open ourselves up, we become empowered 
and have the courage to have  an open mind. At  level 
200, we have the capacity to face the truth and begin 
to take responsibility for it. 

Victims do not take responsibility and instead say, 
"Well, you know, the reason I got this is because of the 
bacteria," or, "The reason I got this is the virus;' or,"The 
reason I have this is because of the cancer cells." It is 
always  something  outside  themselves  and  their  con­

CANCER 

439 

sciousnesses that they become the victims of it.When 
we open our minds, we can get to own that we may 
have  had  something  to  do  with  it,  and  that what  is 
happening in our life is related to something we have 
been holding in mind, often unconsciously. 

The  energy  field  right  above  Courage  is  called 
Neutral.At this level, the arrow goes upward, and the 
energy  field  has  jumped  up  to  250. The  emotional 
state  is  called detached, or nonattached. One  experi­
ences the okayness of life and a new and greater free­
dom, even with serious  situations  because  all  events 
call  for  the  same  need  to  confront  the  truth within 
oneself  and  ascertain  what  one's  position  is  about 
that, including fatalism. 

Fatalism is  an idea we had in the military service 
during World War II  about the bullet-if it was meant 
for us, it had our name on it, so there was no point in 
being  afraid  of bullets  because  if it  didn't  have  our 
name on it, it was not going to hit us anyway.That can 
be  expressed  as  'karma'. Whatever  is  going  to  be  is 
destiny. Karma is the way it is  supposed to be, so the 
fatalistic position gives us a certain peace of mind; we 
are  detached. When the  person with cancer reaches 
that point, they say, "Well, look. If I  survive, I  survive, 
and  if I  don't,  I  don't. You  know  what  I  mean.  I'm 
doing the best I can. If I make it, I make it. If I don't, I 
don't, and I'm prepared to go either way" (Le., resig­
nation  to  God's Will-from  dust  we  arise  and  then 
return).We accept the fact that protoplasm is intrinsi­
cally temporary. 

That is  certainly a  far  more  comfortable  position 
than  to  be  in  Grief about  it,  or  have  self-pity,  anger, 

440 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

resentment,  arrogance,  or  denial.  People  may  also 
deny  that  they  have  the  cancer. They  will  come  up 
with a thought that it has been cured without having 
done the work necessary to bring it about as a reality 
in their life. It is sort of magical thinking. 

When we move above that to a willingness and a 

friendly view of the world where we see life  as  chal­
lenging  and  hopeful,  we  discover,  "Yes,  there  are 
answers. Yes, there are lots of people walking around 
who have had terminal, even fatal (hopeless) diseases 
of all kinds, including cancer." 

In this situation, we have introduced the intention 
to  create  our power, to  prove  our  power, including 
accepting the  fact  that yes, we can let go of this  ill­
ness, and  yes,  there  are  healing  modalities. This  is  a 
harmonious world in which there are lots  of people 
who  have  recovered  from  this  illness  and  are  very 
happy to share with us the truth that they have recov­
ered. This  is  because  they have  experienced  God  as 
being merciful. 

The  people  in the  energy fields  at the bottom of 
the Map of Consciousness frequently conceive of God 
as  punitive,  or  they  do  not  believe  in  God.  They 
believe in self-pUnishment in one form  or another, or 
in pain and suffering. 

Feeling  adequate  and  confidant  that yes, there  is 

an  answer  begins  the  transformation  in  conscious­
ness. It moves us up to the willingness to become the 
energy field called Love.This is a crucial level because 
the energy field of Love is the one that heals, as exem­
plified  by all  those organizations that are famous  for 
their capacity to heal, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, 

CANCER 

441 

A Course in Miracles, faith-based recovery groups, and 
others. 

There are also spontaneous remissions and recov­
eries from almost every hopeless, progressive, chronic, 
intractable  disease  for  which  there  is  no  scientific 
cure, and for which medicine has admitted there is no 
cure.We know that there are millions of people walk­
ing  around who have  totally recovered from  just the 
illness  of  alcoholism  alone.  In  fact,  their  lives  were 
transformed  because  the  affliction  was  used  as  a 
springboard  to  a  greater  consciousness,  a  greater 
awareness, and as  a way to move into a  commitment 
to  that  which  is  loving  because  the  nature  of  it  is 
unconditional love. It is  not the conditional love of "I 
will love you if you will do this  or do that." To  move 
into unconditional love begins a  process called reve­
lation, which  starts  the  release  of certain  chemicals 
called endorphins within the mind and the brain. 

All  these  energy. fields  have within the  mind and 
the brain concomitant changes in the enzymes. There 
are  neurotransmitter changes, a  release  and  opening 
of whole  banks  of neurons. Therefore, the  person is 
moved into the healing energy field of lovingness and 
has  at  their fingertips  the  utilization  of millions  and 
millions of neurons that people in a negative emotional 
state  do  not  have  at  their  disposal.  (See  the  Brain 
Function and Physiology Chart, Chapter 3.) These are 
assets.To move into the energy field of Unconditional 
Love  then  starts  the  healing  process. We  found  that 
healing  occurs  at  an  energy  field  that  calibrates  at 
about 540, which is the energy field of the heart. 

How do we bring about the self-healing? We  have 

442 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

to let go of a number of things, the first being uncon­
scious guilt.We have to discover how to unearth what 
we feel  guilty  about, so  we  begin  a  self-questioning 
process. A person is fearful  when  they do  this. They 
say, "Well, if I  start opening Pandora's  Box, I'm going 
to  be  swamped  by all  the  negativity  and  guilt  that I 
have  depressed, repressed, and pushed out of aware­
ness all  my life." 

It is obvious that we need some kind of tool, some 
kind of practical way to process these things as  they 
come up. To begin with, we need a  context, a way in 
which to hold all that comes up in this self-investiga­
tive  process that is  the  realization  of what has  been 
the basis of all our behavior for all  our life. Within the 
appropriate  context  for  holding  the  realizations  as 
they come up, the guilt is  automatically wiped out by 
a higher understanding that results in forgiveness for 
ourself and others 

We  need to realize  that we have committed exactly 
one 'sin' throughout our lives, and it is  the same 'sin' 
over  and  over  again. The  'sin' is  that  everything we 
have  ever  done  (our  intentions  and  purposes)  was 
consequent  to  the  naive  and  basically  innocent 
thought that it would bring about happiness. It is very  . 
important to  know this  and to  realize  that what we 
did at the time was because we thought it was neces­
sary for our survival, and that our survival was neces­
sary for our happiness. 

Wanting happiness is the basis for all human emo­
tions, is it not? In fact, the basic premise, the basic and 
most  primitive  illusion  of all,  is  that  the  body is  the 
source  of our happiness. Therefore, the fear of death 

CANCER 

443 

is  really, "If I  lose  the  body, I  will  lose  the  source  of 
happiness. I will lose consciousness itself." 

People  who are  spiritually  aware  no  longer identify 
their reality as  the physical body. If we are awareness, 
or  consciousness  itself  (out  of  which  comes  the 
knowingness  of what  is  happening  with  mind  and 
body), then the bQdy is the bottom rung on the ladder. 
We  need  to  let  go  of the  negative  emotions  and  to 
stop  suppressing  and  repressing  them. The  tool  for 
doing that is  to let go of resisting them as  they come 
up to our awareness. 

It is  important  to  keep  our  eye  on  the  fact  that 
consciousness within itself is  basically innocent. The 
nature of 'Consciousness is the innocence of the child. 
How did we begin to believe the things we did as we 
grew older? We  look at  the  child and  see  how inno­
cent and trusting it is; it is completely lacking in guile. 
We  know  its  motivations  are  pure,  at  least  in  our 
understanding of purity. 

This  primary innocence  becomes  the  conscious­
ness of the adult because the programs that the child 
buys into are  actually programmable due to the very 
nature  of innocence itself. Because the  child is  inno­
cent and trusting, it begins to buy and believe every­
thing  it  hears,  including  all  the  thoughts  that  later 
express  themselves  as  cancer-all the  thoughts  hav­
ing to do with self-condemnation and fear, and all the 
thoughts  of rejecting  oneself for  the  various  expres­
sions of the limitations of humanness. 

To  heal cancer, we need a willingness to heal our­
selves  by  means  of compassion, which  comes  from 
our  greater,  higher  Self. There  is  the  understanding 

444 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

that, out of innocence, all these weaknesses came out 
of the belief system that expressed itself in  daily  life 
as the thought that if we do this or we have that, then 
we will be happy. Grief or loss affects  us  because we 
thought that something was  going to  be  a  source of 
happiness, and we are regretting what we see as  that 
source. We  get  angry  because  some  obstacle  stands 
between  us  and  our  intentions, what  we  want,  and 
what we consider to be the source of our happiness. 
The anger then results in further guilt. 

Referring again  to  the Map  of Consciousness, we 
can  ask, "What  is  the  illusion  held  in  consciousness 
that is  now expressing itself in the form  of cancer?" 
All  these  levels  from  Courage  on  down bring  about 
the  negative  energy  field  in  which  the  cancer  can 
grow. The illusion is that we all  thought the source of 
happiness is something outside ourselves, that some­
thing  outside  ourselves  has  the  power  to  make  us 
happy. However, the minute we give  away our power 
and project it outside ourselves, we are in a negative 
energy field and set ourselves up as victims. 

An  unconscious  purpose  of the  ego  is  to  prove 
that we are a victim, and the test of cancer is whether 
or not we will continue to go along with this and buy 
into it as do many people in the world.The ego would 
rather be right, even if it costs us our life, than to give 
up the position that it is  the innocent victim and the 
perpetrator  is  something  outside  itself.  (This  is  the 
core paradigm of victimology.) 

Once  we  see  and  own  our  true  innocence,  we 
don't  need  the  pseudoinnocence  of  victimhood 
because there is no Victim.There was only a belief sys­

CANCER 

445 

tern  in  the  first  place  that we  picked  up  out  of our 
innocence. 

The  thought, for  instance, that  success  brings  us 

happiness is  probably the  most  notorious  belief sys­
tem.  As  many  middle-aged  businessmen  who  have 
become  successful  know, what they get  out  of their 
success is a daily headache and exhaustion, a number 
of lawsuits, and some greed and envy from their col­
leagues. They say to themselves, "Where is all the hap­
piness that success was supposed to bring me? Yes, it 
has  brought  me  some  pleasures, such  as  a  nice  car, 
nice  clothes,  a  nice  address,  and  a  nice  home."  But 
those things are not happiness. 

Worldly  success  does  not bring about happiness. 
Disillusionment and the feeling of guilt come about as 
a  result  of feeling  that  we  have  suddenly  sold  our­
selves out, and that we have sold out the truth about 
ourselves. 

To  recover from  cancer  or any  other illness, we 
have  to reconnect with our own intrinsic innocence 
and  reaffirm  the  truth  of that  which  we  are  within 
ourselves, which has been totally unaffected by all  of 
life's  events. We  have  to  re-own  that  level  of aware­
ness  of  self  that  is  beyond  all  worldly  events. 
Something  within  us  remains  the  same,  no  matter 
what  is  going  on  in  our life  experience.  Something 
has  remained  unchanged.  It  is  the  something  that 
wakes  us  up  the  first  thing  in  the  morning-before 
we realize where we are, or what day it is, or before 
we realize what we are  supposed to do today. 

When we wake up into that state of awareness, we 
are  much closer to the truth of our own higher self. 

446 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

We  realize that it is  totally unaffected and beyond all 
life's events. It is only when our consciousness comes 
down into the world of concrete thought that we say, 
"Oh, yes, it's Monday." And, "Oh, yes, I  have to gO."We 
are  really  leaving  being  close  to  the  truth  of  that 
which we truly are, which is beyond all that.We re-own 
the  capacity  to  decide  what  our  position  will  be 
about  life's  events  and  all  those  things  that  bring 
about  extreme  duress.  We  can  become  victims  of 
them, or we  can see  them  as  a  springboard  to  tran­
scendence. 

The first  thing to let go of is  unconscious guilt. A 
Course  in Miracles  is  a  teaching of love, forgiveness, 
and  the letting go  of fear.  Many people I  know who 
have  recovered  from  cancer,  multiple  sclerosis,  and 
other debilitating illnesses have done so as a result of 
this particular course or others that are similar. All  of 
them  are  designed  to  show  us  how  to  change  our 
point of view,how to let go of condemnation of self 
and others, how to let go of guilt and fear, and how to 
move ourselves into the willingness to be loving, for­
giving, and compassionate. 

Out of that comes the desire to understand, so  in 
self-healing, we need to almost take ourselves in our 
own  arms  and  become  compassionate  and  healing 
because all of us have the healer within us. We  begin 
now to heal our humanness. How do we get rid of the 
ego?  It is not  done by making it an enemy, by trying 
to attack it, or by getting into an adversarial position 
with it but instead by loving it out of existence. We 
literally  dissolve  the  ego  through  compassion,  love, 
and understanding. 

CANCER 

447 

When we look within, we can really see that any­
thing we have ever done in our lifetime was done out 
of  innocence,  and  when  our  main  intention  is  to 
understand  that,  it  becomes  healed  out  of compas­
sion.When we do this with other people and let go of 
the  desire  to  be  judgmental  towards  ourselves  and 
others, then our own energy field begins to move in a 
positive direction.The cancer cannot grow in a positive 
energy field, only in a negative one. 

In  looking  at  the  Map  of Consciousness, we  can 
see that Love at level 500 is available to all of us.There 
is  a  commitment to  unconditional love. What is  that 
kind  of love?  We  are  not  talking  about  Hollywood­
style  emotionalism,  sentimentality,  attachment, 
dependence,  and  mutual  control  back  and  forth. 
Instead,  we  are  talking  about  an  intention,  best 
described  as  lovingness,  to  commit  ourselves  to  nur­
ture and support all life, no matter what its expression. 
Life  flows  equally into  the saint and the criminal 
alike.  Life,  truth,  and  that  which  is  the  God  within 
make  no  judgment. Life  flows  equally  into  all. As  it 
says  in  the  scriptures,  the  rain  falls  equally  on  all. 
Moving  out  of  judgmentalism  is  the  lesson  in  that 
example. Life  flows  equally  into  all  so  we  allow  our 
unconditional love to support the truth of everyone, 
including ourselves. Our own capacity for self-healing 
depends  on  accepting  that "With  God's  help, I  have 
the  power  to  make  the  decision  to  go  through  the 
necessary inner work to bring about a healing of this 
illness." That  is  the  difference  between treating, cur­
ing, and healing. Treating is relieving a  symptom, cur­
ing  is  overcoming  the  disease,  but  healing  includes 

448 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the whole person. 

We  set  our intention  on  accomplishing  peace  of 
mind  because  that  is  the  end  result  of healing. The 
end result is  an inner tranquility, not an  indifference 
to what happens to the body, but a  transcendence of 
the body. No longer do we identify as that physicality. 
It belongs to us  and is  part of us, but it is  within us 
because we realize  that we are more than the physi­
cal body. 

The  healing  of cancer  depends  on  realizing  that 
we are the one who decides that we are greater than 
the  physical body, and that it is  within the power of 
consciousness  to  call  forth  the  healer  within  and 
begin to utilize some of the consciousness techniques 
that have been presented. 

We  can  ask  ourselves, "Can  I  allow  myself to  be 
healed? Is  this healable? What within me needs to be 
healed?"  It  still  does  not  tell  us  literally  in  our  own 
particular case what needs to be healed. 

When I had severe diverticulitis that recurred for 
many  years,  I  ended  up  in  the  hospital  and  had  to 
have  emergency  blood  transfusions. The  last  time  I 
was  there, I almost expired. I followed  these general 
principles and it got better. It did not return for some 
years,  but  suddenly,  something  happened  in  my  life 
and  I  had  a  recurrence.  It  was  the  worst  attack  of 
diverticulitis I had ever had.The pain was overwhelm­
ing;  the  cramping, bleeding, and  all  the  other symp­
toms  started  all  over  again,  this  time  with  greater 
severity,  and  I  asked, "What  is  the  meaning  of this? 
Why?" I  began  to  question  within, and as  I  did  so, a 
technique came to me of going way, way back to dis­

CANCER 

cover the exact, precise meaning that lay within this 
particular illness (suppressing negative feelings out of 
guilt about having them in one's 'gut'). 

For most of us, following the general laws of heal­
ing is  sufficient  to  bring  about recovery from  an  ill­
ness. For some of us, there is a very particular lesson 
or message that a given illness offers·. The illness will 
get better, but then something will linger on, or it may 
recur. The purpose of that is to bring about the aware­
ness that there is  a specific hidden message that was 
missed, and there is more to learn, which is often the 
consequence of a karmic pattern. 

The message for all  of us is that these major con­
frontations  of  life  are  something  that  can  lead  to 
major  transformation  and  unseen  spiritual  benefit. 
.The physical body is  temporary, whereas the spirit is 
not  subject  to  time. The  acceptance  of  that  reality 
then leads to further awareness, which is to transcend 
the concept of recovery as a gain. This initially seems 
paradoxical  because  the  hope  for  recovery  is  often 
the initiator of the process of spiritual growth. 

When illness is the motivator for spiritual growth, 
it often starts out from  the level of fear  and includes 
anger  and  guilty  regret. With  surrender  and  accept­
ance, these begin to diminish, and spiritual growth is 
valued  for  its  own  sake.  Eventually,  with  very  deep 
surrender, there even comes a time when resisting the 
illness is also surrendered and recovery is up to God. 
This  step may  also  bring to  awareness  the  concepts 
and  understanding  of  the  nature  of  karma,  which 
itself  is  a  subtle  study. What  does  the  term 'karma' 
mean from a practical viewpoint? Is it just a theory, or 

450 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

is it a verifiable reality? 

In its broadest generic sense, karma denotes one's 
total  inheritance-physical,  mental,  and. spiritual.  It 
signifies  the  contextual  significance  of  inherited 
humanness  itself,  with  its  overall  implications  and 
genetic  propensities. With consciousness  research, it 
can be affirmed that life itself cannot be extinguished 
but only made to change from physical expressions to 
purely  energy  forms.  (This  statement  calibrates  at 
1,000.) Thus, human  life  can  be  understood  to  be  a 
valuable  opportun~ty for  transcending limitations via 
the classic undoing of negative karma and the advan­
tages of acquiring positive karma.These are expressed 
as proclivities in that there is freedom of choice. With 
deep surrender of the personal will, there is eventually 
loss of the fear of physical death itself. 

If we give  the  cancer within us  our blessing  and 
say, "Thank you because you are giving me the power 
to transform my consciousness and expand my aware­
ness," then we will be very thankful in the end. Many 
people who have recovered from these illnesses look 
back and say, "How grateful I am for that illness arising 
in my life, for it was the springboard to spiritual awak­
ening." A  benefit  of a  life-threatening  illness  is  that  it 
breaks down the denial of mortality that is necessary to 
initiate serious spiritual work in most people who are 
otherwise  too  busy  with  the  affairs  of  daily  life  to 
embark upon an inner quest. 

CHAPTER  15 

Death and Dying 

Death and dying might be called saying farewell to the 
body. Hopefully, by the  end of this  chapter, it will  be 
possible  to  view  the  process  in  a  more  lighthearted 
way than usual. I am going to share what I have learned 
from  my clinical experience and research, along with 
personal experiences, in a way that has not really been 
shared previously with people. I am just going to share 
what I  have  experienced about  death  and  dying  and 
what has come to my own awareness. 

Lecture audiences have said it is not possible to do 
it  that way because  others  are  not  that sophisticated 
and are  not going to understand it. On the contrary, I 
have found  that people who  are  involved in spiritual 
work  understand  it  right  away  and  do  not  have  the 
slightest problem. 

In  the  process,  we  will  refer  to  the  Map  of 
Consciousness because, in discussing death and dying, 
we will  talk  about consciousness  and  the  two  things 
that people really fear. One is  the physical experience 
itself, and the other is  what they fantasize to be a loss 
of awareness, consciousness, and the awareness of exis­
tence. 

We  will  refer again  to the levels  of consciousness 
that are  shown on the  Map. The  scale  represents  the 
human ego, or the self with a small's', which we com:­
monly refer to as 'me' or 'myself'. In the middle of the 
scale  is  the  level  called  Courage. Below Courage, the 
arrows of all  the feeling  states are in a  negative direc­
tion,  which  are  calibrated  as  to  their  relative  energy 
and power. For example,Apathy has much less energy 

451 

452 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

than Fear, which is calibrated at 100. Guilt is at level 30; 
Apathy, or hopelessness, is at 50; Grief and regret are at 
75;  Fear,  in  its  forms  of worry  and  anxiety, is  at  100. 
Desire, with  cravingness  and  wantingness,  is  at  125. 
Anger goes up to 150, and Pride goes up to 175. 

By  virtue  of telling  the  truth) in  this  case that life 

comes only from  life  (which is a very important state­
ment), we reach level  200, which discerns  truth from 
falsehood. Most  of the fears  of death are the result of 
the  failure  to  understand  and  know  that  life  comes 
from life and is indestructible. Like  matter or energy, it 
can only change the form  of expression (calibrates as 
true). When we tell the truth, we see that the negative 
energy field  begins  to  go  upward  in a  positive  direc­
tion. As  we move towards the conscious awareness of 
the Source of life  itself, we move into higher states of 
Love and Joy.Then we come up to a level at 600 where 
there  is  a  transition into a  different paradigm and the 
experience of existence in which one no longer iden­
tifies  with  a  separate,  individual,  physical  body.  We 
begin to realize the truth of who we are.The expansion 
of consciousness goes beyond the individual small self. 
To the right of these levels of consciousness on the 
Map are the emotions that correspond with each level. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  scale,  shame  and  self-hatred 
accompany Guilt. The  process going  on in conscious­
ness  is  in a  destructive direction. Apathy is  associated 
with hopelessness and despair, and the process is  the 
loss of energy. Grief is associated with regret, loss, and 
despondence. The process is one of becoming dispirit­
ed. Fear is  associated with worry and anxiety and has 
to  do  with  the  future, which  leads  to  the  process  of 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

453 

deflation. Generally, when people think of death, they 
think of grief and fear. They may even move to a high­
er state calledAnger because they are angry and resent­
ful about the whole experience and then include griev­
ances about it. 

As  we move upwards, we come to the level called 
Pride, which calibrates  at  175. Pride feels  a  lot better 
than the lower states, but unfortunately, denial accom­
panies pride. We  have to learn how to overcome some 
of this  denial.  It  arises  out  of fear,  and  once  fear  is 
understood, denial drops away and one can then move 
up to the level of Courage, which has a lot more power 
at 200. 

The  energy  field  of Courage  represents  the  emo­
tional  capacity to face,  cope, and  handle life's  events, 
because  telling  the  truth  about  a  thing  empowers  a 
person. A  continuing  positive  attitude  can then move 
us up to the state of Willingness at 310, where we say, 
"I want to know the truth about the matter for its own 
sake."The energy field then becomes powerful because 
now intention is put into it to know more about a goal 
and  the  capacity to  accept  the  prevailing  conditions 
around it. 

Below  consciousness  level  200,  power  is  given 
away,  resulting  in  doubt  and  lack  of confidence. The 
willingness  to  look  into  a  matter  then  results  in  an 
open  mind  that  moves  us  up  to  level  350,  called 
Acceptance, which  is  an  important  capacity for  han­
dling the prospect of mortality. At this level we re-own 
our power and begin to feel adequate and confident. It 
is  the  beginning  of transformation  in  consciousness. 
There is the awareness that "I, myself, am the source of 

454 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

my own happiness, and I have the capacity to find out 
the truth for myself:' Eventually, we can move up to the 
energy field of Love at 500, where there is the capacity 
for and dedication to nurturing and supporting life, and 
the willingness to be forgiving. With that comes a reve­
lation about an energy field called JoY that calibrates at 
540  and  is  associated with healing  and gratitude. Joy 
brings  an  inner serenity and  is  characterized by com­
passion, which is  the  ability  to  see into the hearts  of 
others. There  is  also  the  willingness  to  be lOVing  and 
nonjudgmental of life in allits expressions. 

Transformation  is  then  quiet, and  we  move  up  to 
the state called Peace at 600, or the peace of God. The 
feeling associated with that is eventually bliss and then 
progressive  states  of  illumination.  We  may  feel  as 
though we are  encompassed within a  light. As  we go 
into an ineffable state, it is so exquisite that it is difficult 
to  describe. The  importance  of the  body  disappears, 
and  it  becomes irrelevant. It  is  forgotten  because  the 
body is  associated with identification with a personal, 
separate, limited  self. At  the  more  enlightened  states, 
there is  an exquisite expansion of consciousness and a 
loss  of identification  with the  body and  the  personal 
self. At the energy fields  above the 600s are  the states 
of feeling completeness, wholeness, and oneness with 
all of life, and a oneness with God. 

Humility  results  in  an  open  mind. An  open  mind 
says  for the fITst  time, "What is  truth?  Please, Lord, let 
me open my mind to know within my own conscious­
ness what is the truth for my own self:' 

Our  expectations  of  death  reflect  conceptions 
about the nature of Divinity.Thus, a person at the level 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

455 

of Neutral  at  250 would  see  the  world  as  okay. They 
would  see  all  experience,  including  even  death,  as 
okay, and therefore  see  God as  freedom. Lower levels 
lead to the fear of God, guilt, and expecting God to be 
the great avenger because of the prevalence of jealousy 
and hate. The God of hatred is  near the bottom of the 
chart  and  pictured  as  an  entity  that  hates  man  and 
man's humanness, all of which is  a paradox inasmuch 
as God created us. 

When we move up to the levels of truth, we expe­
rience  life,  the  world,  and  all  the  experiences  in  the 
world, including death, and expect them to be positive 
ones. God  now  becomes  promising  and  hopeful. We 
can then look forward  to death as  some kind of great 
release into a  much larger expansion in consciousness 
and  awareness  called  Heaven.  (The  actual  reality 
revealed  by consciousness  research  is  that  there .are 
.multiple regions of Heaven.) 

As  we  move  beyond  the  level  of  acceptance, 
which  we  do  by  owning  back  our  own  power  to 
know, we  move  into  a  loving  state  that  is  forgiving 
and understanding, with the beginning of revelations 
and  the  experience  of all  life  as  loving. We  begin  to 
see  that  love  is  present  everywhere. Therefore,  we 
move on up to a God who is merciful and represents 
unconditional love. The realization that lovingness is 
a basic reality leads to an inner state of joy. Out of that 
comes  compassion, the  transfiguration  of conscious­
ness that reveals  the perfection of all  creation. There 
is the realization of the oneness of all life that results 
in the state of bliss. There are also states of enlight­
enment  and  illumination  in  which  one  becomes 

456 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

conscious and aware of unity and oneness. 

At  level  600, we move  out of the  energy fields  of 
ordinary consciousness  and  into those  that are  called 
nonlinear.  In  the  mid-600s  are  the  more  advanced 
states  of awareness  and consciousness called 'enlight­
ened' and 'illumined'. 

As  the foregoing  may sound philosophical or the­
oretical, I am going to share things I have learned clin­
ically  through many years  of experience plus_ events 
that I have personally experienced.As a result, we will 
have  a  more  practical  field  of reference  about  what 
the  death  experience  really  entails.  I  will  be  going 
back to childhood experiences to relate some things 
that happened to  me  and  how they correlated with 
other things that happened later. 

When I was about twelve years  old, I was a paper­
boy  in  northern Wisconsin.  One  night,  it  was  below 
zero, and I felt like I was practically freeZing to death. I 
dug a hole in the side of a huge snow bank and crawled 
inside  the  cubbyhole that I  had  made. The  snow was 
piled about twenty feet  high on the  side  of the  high­
way,  and  I  crawled  into  this  refuge  and  curled  up  in 
order to just get out of the fierce  and relentless wind. 
Within a few seconds, I began to experience a state of 
relaxation, and  a  state  of profound warmth began to 
come over the body. It was a state of exquisite pleasure, 
and I began to forget about the body. The body just did 
not seem to exist anymore, and instead, an incredible, 
blissful state of peace overcame me. I was surrounded 
by light, but the light had the  quality of touching me 
and being with me as an infinitely loving consciousness 
that was enveloping and dissolving. I just dissolved and 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

457 

became at one with this infmite field because it had no 
beginning  and no  end; it had no  dimensions  and was 
outside of time. 

The state of the true Self experientially lasted for 
eons of timelessness.The experience was total, and at 
every  instant,  it  was  all  encompassing,  timeless, 
serene,  and  complete. There  was  nothing  missing, 
nothing  lacking,  and  nothing  further  to  be  accom­
plished. It was  a  state  of profound  Love,  Peace, and 
completeness that is  beyond description. 

At flfst, there was an inner feeling of relief, followed 
by  a  quiet  joy  and  ecstasy,  and  then  it went  beyond 
ecstasy.  It went beyond  bliss  and  became  an  eternal, 
infinite  state,  far  beyond  ordinary  consciousness. 
Curiously, the Self is  more truly personal than the ego 
self. Sometime later, my father discovered where I was 
and shook me. He had a very upset, anxious look on his 
face  and  said, "Don't  ever  do  that  again!  Don't  you 
know you could freeze to death?" 

I  had no context within which to hold this expe­
rience  or  even  know  what  to  call  it.  It was  a  very 
profound  experience,  and 'in  the  mind  of  adoles­
cence,  there  was  really  nothing  that  could  be  said 
about it. I could not mention anything about it to my 
father  because  he  would  not  have  had  any  way  in 
which to hold it.Additionally, he was frightened at the 
time,  so  neither  of  us  knew  what  the  experience 
meant or signified. 

No books on the 'near-death experience' were gen­
erally  available  at  the  time. The  movie  Resurrection 
only  came  out  in  the  last  decade.  (By  the  way,  that 
movie was clinically accurate.) All those who have had 

458__~_--=H~E.:..:A--=L:...::I--=N,-G:;:........::Ac.::...::....:N-=D:..........::R-C-.:E=-C--=--=O_V,-E=.--=:R--=Y~


__ 

that  kind  of experience  verify  the  truth  of what  the 
woman in the movie experienced. She was killed in an 
automobile  accident. It is  the  true  story  of a  person 
who was declared dead on the operating table. She left 
the body and experienced that same incredible, infmite 
state as I have just described it. 

My  father  and  I  had  no  context  within  which  to 
hold this experience or to understand it, and although 
I mentioned it briefly to him, he did not know what to 
make of it either. Besides, he was too frightened at the 
time so the  experience was  never mentioned again. I 
did not understand it until I was much older. 

Later, when I  was in my thirties, I  was dying of a 
very serious and progressive ailment.As I lay in bed in 
a  very moribund condition and grave  state, suddenly, 
much to my surprise, 'I' was  about  ten feet  over the 
physical body. There I was, in space, in a perfect body 
that was transparent and ethereal. It was weightless, 
yet I had all my faculties. I could think, reason, see, and 
hear.  I  looked  down  at  the  physical  body  that  was 
lying in the bed about eight to ten feet below me, and 
it looked like it was. about to expire. There I was, out­
side the physical body, looking down at it, aware that 
that  which  I  really  am  is  something  other  than  the 
physical body. (At that time, I  had  never heard of an 
out-of-body experience.) 

During this very critical illness, I found myself totally 
out of the body, but it was not time for me to leave, so 
at a later point, I had to go back into the body. I recov­
ered from that particular episode of the illness and con­
tinued  to live, but later I  relapsed, and the illness  got 
worse again. This time, it was grave  indeed, and I was 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

459 

really  right at  the very door of death itself. I was in a 
state of deep despair, a state of hell, a state of absolute 
and  total  helplessness  and  hopelessness,  and  only  a 
couple of seconds a'Yay from leaving the body again. 

At  the  time,  I  had  been  an  agnostic  for  twenty 

years.  Despite  havirlg  had  these  incredible  experi­
ences of being something other than th~  body, I  still 
did not have a context within which to hold it. I was 
still  an  agnostic, and I was  dying. Suddenly I  said, "If 
there is a God, I ask him to help me," and then I went 
into oblivion. 

When  I  regained  awareness,  there  had  been  a 
major, total  transformation. There was  no longer any 
identification with a personal physical body. It walked 
around and did all the things it was supposed to, but 
I stood in an energy field that was infinite. The power 
and dimension of the field were beyond description. 
It held me in absolute safety; I was like  a rock. At the 
same time, it was exqUisitely soft and gentle. Its exqui­
site gentleness and softness held me in its inImite, lov­
ing embrace. The body moved spontaneously as there 
was no personal will, mind, or entity such as a person­
al self. I walked around in that state for some months 
and still did not really have a context within which to 
hold it. It was not mentioned to anyone  as  there was 
nothing I could say about it. It was like going from an 
absolute  blackness, feeling  totally  cut  off from  God, 
into a state in which what had stood between me and 
God  had  been removed, and  I  was  now standing  in 
that Infinite Presence. 

It is  only in recent decades that near-death experi­
ences  have  become  more  commonly  known.  Classic 

460 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

stories written in Victorian times were known only by 
a  very  limited  number  of people, but  now there  are 
many  books  about  the  subject.  Surveys  have  shown 
that approximately sixty-five percent of the population 
has memory of near-death or out-of-body experiences. 
Later on, I found out this was a technique that we 
could learn to  do  at  will. I  learned that there  are  all 
kinds of people who leave the body spontaneously or 
at will. Some people are born with this gift while others 
can sit down to  meditate  and  immediately have  this 
experience. 

As  a  clinician and scientist, I  became  interested in 
this  phenomenon  and  discovered  a  scientifically 
oriented organization where this was  being studied. I 
read Journeys out of the Body by Robert Monroe and 
then visited the Monroe Institute where I participated 
in  a  ten-day  training. They  have  audio  tapes  with  a 
frequency  that  entrains  the  brain  to  reach  a  certain 
altered state of consciousness in which one can leave 
the body at will. I  also learned that people who were 
not born with the capacity to reach this  state or who 
do not develop  it spontaneously could learn to  do it. 
The  purpose  of that  was  to  learn  that  we  are  some­
thing other than the body, that we are greater than the 
physical body, and that the physical body belongs to us 
but we are not limited to it. 

The  best-known writings  on the  subject of death 
and  dying  are  those  of  Elisabeth  Kubler-Ross  (On 
Death and Dying), which really opened up the subject 
for  the  first  time  for  discussion  and  familiarity  with 
what had previously been a  taboo subject. The  stages 
she outlined are now relatively well known. 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

461 

There is, of course, a prevalence of denial as an ini­
tial way of handling the shock, and physical death is a 
primary biological fear common to  sentient beings in 
general who, over the millennia, have devised innumer­
able ways to avoid death and stay alive as an individual. 

Survival techniques evolved as a function of biolog­
ical  intelligence  expressed  as  learning  and  memory. 
While lesser forms of life  are subject to biological pro­
toplasmic  death,  only  humankind  can  consciously 
anticipate it with foreknowledge. Denial is  one of the 
basic mechanisms of the ego to protect itself from fear. 
With surrender of denial, the fear  arises  of ceasing to 
exist  for  the  ego  lacks  spiritual  awareness  due  to  its 
identification with the body. 

The stage of 'bargaining' is then an attempt by the 
ego/mind to seek to  delay the inevitable, and God is 
then  recognized  and  entreated  to  intervene  on  the 
ego's  behalf. Anger also  erupts  at the loss  of control 
and  the  confrontation  to  the  ego's  narcissistic  core 
that its infantile will is  up against an insurmountable 
obstacle  and  cannot  have  its  own  way.  It  does  not 
seem  fair  that  its  wishes  are  being  frustrated  and 
denied.This brings up grief and mourning over loss of 
the previously anticipated future  of endless ongoing 
individual existence. 

The  basis  of  all  the  foregoing  reactions  is  the 
identification  of  self  and  its  existence  with  the 
physical body as  the source of eXistence. Thus, it is 
the  meaning  of the  body  that  brings  up the  resist­
ance to the prospect of its demise. The prospect of 
physical death  brings  up  the fear  of oblivion, cessa­
tion of consciousness and awareness, and its singular 

462 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

characteristic of experiencing. 

The  processing  of  the  physical  stages  is  greatly 
facilitated  by  spiritual  alignment  and  awareness, 
which progressively becomes the focus  of attention, 
along with one's relationship with God. Hope and faith 
plus surrender facilitate  the  strong emergence of pro­
gressive reliance on spiritual teachings and allow for a 
transformation  of consciousness  to  the  higher levels, 
which  brings  peace. Acceptance  is  facilitated  by  the 
realization  that  the  death  process  is  universal  and 
applies  to  all  liVing  beings  now and for  aU  past time. 
Thus, there is the relief of sharing the common experi­
ence of all  who are still alive  or who have ever lived. 
This  facilitates  a  certain trust in the  process  itself by 
virtue of its universality. 

Processing  the  pain  of  loss  reqUires  relinqUish­
ment of the many attachments that the ego has found 
dUring a lifetime, especially to loved ones. This is facil­
itated  by  the  realization  that  in  time,  they,  too,  will 
face  the  death process and thus  share the  same  des­
tiny.  Love  then becomes the  means to transcend the 
ego's  limited  view  of reality  and  identification  with 
the ever-evolving Reality of Divinity as Love itself. The 
more  we love  others, the less  the feeling  of loss, for 
love is realized to be the sole value of others. The self 
separates, whereas  the  Self unites'. Thus  death  is  a 
fulcrum to illumination. 

The greater the  amount of spiritual work one has 
done during their lifetime, the less there is left to do at 
the prospect of death. A very evolved person is  com­
fortable  with the prospect of leaving the  body at any­
time.  One  way  to  accelerate  spiritual  progress  is  to 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

463 

entertain  the  prospect  of  one's  eventual  death  and 
process all the attachments and illusions that come up 
about that eventuality. Paradoxically, the exercise greatly 
reduces one's fears of life. 

At  one  time  in  my  life,  I  was  studying  alternate 

methods of consciousness-research techniques, includ­
ing a breathing method. In this experience, gently and 
softly, there was spontaneously the same experience of 
suddenly leaVing the body and no longer experiencing 
it. Repeatedly  I  would go  back into  the  experience  I 
had in the snow bank when I was twelve years old.The 
re-experiencing, the forgetting about the body-as one 
leaves  it,  one forgets  everything  that went on with  it 
within a  couple of seconds, so there is  no memory of 
what happened in that lifetime or even of one's name. 
All  of that becomes irrelevant and has no bearing, sig­
nificance, or reality. Instead, one begins to experience 
that which one really is, along with that same  experi­
ence  of  incredible  peace  and  lovingness  outside  of 
time  and  space. There  is  just  pure  awareness.  One  is 
exquisitely  aware  of the  existence  of existence  as  an 
infmite being. 

Returning to the Map of Consciousness, at the bot­
tom  of the  scale  there  is  great  concern  with  having­
ness, and status is based on what we own.As we move 
up into the more powerful levels of courage, capacity, 
and capability, there is great concern with what we do. 
As  we move toward the top of the scale, there is only 
the  awareness  and  value  of  that  which  we  have 
become and are. Nobody cares any longer about what 
we  have  or do. I  discovered  that when we  leave  the 
body, we  take  with us  what we are. What we  experi­

464 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

ence is that which we have been willing to know and 
own about ourself. The truth about ourself, that which 
we are, is  what we experience, and all  that we had is 
forgotten. There is  no memory of money, possessions, 
or power; all  that we did is  forgotten. In this state, if a 
person were asked what they did when they thought 
they  were  a  body  and  moved  around  in  the  world, 
there would be no recall as to what that was, but that 
which they are is  overwhelming. 

Another interesting personal experience  occurred 
later  in  life.  My  mother  and  I  were  not  very  close 
because  she  lived  in  Florida, and I  lived  in  New York 
and was not able to visit her very often. One day while 
out in the woods in New York, suddenly I had an intu­
itive knowing that I should go down to Florida. 'Out of 
the blue' , so to speak, I suddenly knew that my mother 
was  dying. It was like  a  call  to "come  down here like 
right away." I went back to the house and made a plane 
reservation on the flfst  flight  I  could get for  the  next 
morning. After  making  the  reservation,  I  called  her 
house and was told that she was in the hospital. I knew 
she was dying. 

When I got to the hospital, I had a tremendous feel­
ing  of  relief  for  my  mother.  I  suddenly  felt  a  great 
release of tension.When I walked into her room, it was 
crowded  with  hospital  personnel.  I  was  a  'big-name. 
specialist' from  New York,  and  this  little  hospital was 
going  to  make  sure  that  nothing  went  wrong,  that 
everything was covered, so practically the whole staff 
was there.And there was my mother, with her oxygen 
tank and all kinds of tubes sticking in her all over, along 
with all kinds of meters and electronic things to make 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

465 

her heart go.All of a sudden, just as I entered the room, 
at that moment I knew she had just left the body, and I 
experienced her absolute  ecstasy as  she left. She  was 
so glad to get out. It was like an infmite state of joy and 
ecstasy,  and  I  was  psychically  at  one  with her  in  the 
experience-I  felt  exactly  what  she  was  feeling.  She 
had waited to leave the body until I got there, and both 
of our wills  joined to  know the  experience. She  had 
wanted me to experience the experience with her, and 
so I experienced that ever-expanding, infmite, absolute 
state of ecstasy as she went into that state. Nobody was 
ever happier to get out of that body than my mother. 
For  years  she  had been hoping  to  get out, and when 
she did, she was very, very happy. 

Of course, the hospital personnel did not know she 
had died yet, so sort of telepathically, I sent the thought 
to  the  cardiologist  that "She's  dead; you  can tum the 
machine off." He suddenly got the idea and said, "Thrn 
off the  machine." The  machine  that was  creating  the 
heartbeat was turned off and the doctor put the stetho­
scope to her chest and said, "She's dead. Oh."Then the 
hospital staff looked at me as though they expected me 
to go into a  state  of unhappiness or something, and I 
did not. I was in a state of ecstasy, in the same state my 
mother was; I was with her. What was there to grieve 
about? My mother was never happier in her life.There 
was, however, a nurses' assistant, an LPN, who also 'got 
it'. She  looked  at me, broke  into  a  big  grin, and  said, 
"Boy, was she  ever happy," and I  said, "You  got it!  She 
sure was!"The two of us grinned at each other, know­
ing exactly what was going on, but nobody else  really 
understood. They probably thought I  did  not love  my 

466 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

mother and was glad  to  see  her go, or I  was going to 
inherit a lot of money or something. Only God knows 
what their minds  thought about it, but the  LPN  and I 
knew  what  was  happening, which  took  us  into  the 
state of joy. 

My own experiences, memories, and recalls of leav­
ing the body behind were of two different kinds-the 
one of infinite lovingness that I had experienced many 
times, and then those experiences of going out of the 
body and experiencing nothing. Either way, we do not 
experience  our  physical  death,  but  in  the  'nothing' 
experience, the recall would be back in another body. 
In this lifetime, at age three, out of oblivion, I was 
suddenly aware  of the  body. I  can look  back at  early 
childhood  and  remember  that  moment  where  there 
was the realization that "I am. I exist." 

Earlier we  said  that  what we  hold  in mind  deter­

mines  what  we  experience  in  the  world, and  that  is 
what our experience of God is.  Many  people hold  in 
mind the idea that after death, we go out of the body 
into oblivion, but I  had the experience of the Inftnite 
Presence-an infinite, almost angelic  experience. As  I 
was looking at that one day, there came the return of 
memories of being 'on the other side' with those who 
were  dying. It came back flrst  as  an  experience  on a 
battlefleld, and I remembered being with dying people, 
looking at their agony, fear, and physical pain. Suddenly, 
there was this  infinite  lovingness  and infinite  state of 
being with the person who waS dying. Before my very 
eyes,  they  would  become  transformed. They  would 
leave  the  physical  body  behind,  and  all  the  wounds 
would heal. It was my love united with the love of God, 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

467 

as though I turned the heart over to God, and now the 
energy field  of angelic  beings  who  are  absolute  love 
poured through, but my consciousness was there with 
this  dying  person. The  exquisite  love  of that  energy 
would then heal all  the wounds and the fear.  I would 
see the fear, and the person's eyes would open again. 
They would look at me, and I could see they were just 
melting with the  experience. All  the  terror, fear,  guilt, 
and  feeling  of  being  separated  dissolved,  and  they 
would  look  at  me  with  recognition. Then  I  saw  that 
they would see that which was significant or divine to 
them, and that I, myself, was formless. The same experi­
ence has also happened in this lifetime. 

When  we  go  into  higher  states  of consciousness 
where we are no longer the physical body, we see that 
people see what they are  projecting there. The  dying 
person would open their eyes and see us as that which 
would be most significant to them, as we are without 
any form. Sometimes we are seen as  the mother, lover, 
or a crowd of people with whom the person was dearly 
in love. Sometimes they would see a divine figure, but 
this was  happening within the phenomenon of mind 
itself; it was all  the phenomenon of mind. The person 
was experiencing what was most healing to them. 

We have come upon a way of overcoming the fear 
of death. It is  the willingness to be that to ourself and 
to others who are dying.The way to overcome our own 
fear of death is to picture ourself as being on the other 
side,  like  a  first-aid  receiving  station. We  open  our 
hearts and ask to be connected with the angelic forces 
and to  become  one with  them. Now we picture  our­
selves  going  to  those  who  are  dying. We  do  it  now 

468 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 
--------'--------=--~'-------

while  we  are  still  in  our own physical  body, and  we 
send forth that energy of compassion. 

Consciousness itself is not limited by bodies. Bodies 
have  to do with the ego and its  limited viewpoint. We 
send forth the energy field of compassion and picture 
ourselves  in  our imagination. We  can begin it now in 
our imagination with any person because, in the world 
at any  hour,  there  are  over  six  billion  people  on  the 
planet. Thousands  and  thousands  of them  are  dying 
every hour.We  select somebody that we feel we could 
be  most loving  toward-a child  in  a  crib, a  teenager 
just hit by a car, somebody on a  battlefield who is  rid­
dled with bullets, a  mother in  childbirth, or a  person 
committing  suicide. Then  we  picture  the  person  for 
whom  we  have  the  most  compassion,  send  ourself 
forth in our imagination to that person, and see ourself 
as  infinitely  loving. In  a  way, we  are  now more alone 
and yet more not alone  than ever before because we 
can fully  express all  the  tenderness  and love  that we 
have suppressed dUring our whole lifetime. Now is our 
chance to send it forth and be with that person. 

We think of the agony and fear of so many people. 

Then we go  to  them and begin to  heal  them by pic­
turing  ourself  holding  them  in  our  arms,  pouring 
forth the love through our heart. It really comes from 
a high being and radiates out though the heart, suffus­
ing that person with it, and then we begin to see their 
fear  melt  away. As  many  people  die,  whatever  their 
apprehension was before, we will notice that they go 
into profound  states of serenity as  though  that com­
passion  coming from  the  great  beings  of the  world 
reaches  forth  to  them  at  their  moment  of greatest 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

469 

need.  When  the  person  says,  "0  God,  help  me," 
because this is a universe of free will, they then open 
the  door  to  this  compassion  that  is  being  radiated 
forth  by others and now by us. We  are  now by their 
side, and in every way possible, we nurture and heal 
them. We  reach out to them and then lift them out of 
their  body. They  are  safe;  they  are  home;  they  are 
cared for; they are greatly loved by God.They begin to 
get the inner experience of the truth.We  put our per­
sonal self aside because it is not needed here. There is 
no need for the personality, with its likes and dislikes, 
its  aversions  and attractions. Just be that energy that 
flows through the heart. 

Through our willingness, that healing energy flows 
through us and into the being of the other person, and 
we see the transformation before our very eyes; we lit­
erally  see  it. We  see  the  fear  leave  their eyes  and  the 
painful  tension  leave  their  body. We  begin  to  experi­
ence  that  the  pain is  leaving  their  body, and  they go 
into  that  same  state  of infInite  peace, surrounded  by 
the energy of life and love. They are feeling complete, 
total,  and  healed. There  is  no  more  fear,  separation, 
guilt, or anxiety.The two of us are lifted right out of the 
body together. 

I  myself had  a  similar  experience  sometime  back 

when I inadvertently sawed off my thumb with a circu­
lar saw.At flfst there was shock, but then in that shock, 
there was suddenly a sound like a chorus in my mind. 
It  was  as  though  I  was  surrounded by  angelic  forces 
that kept chanting to me as  though I had forgotten it, 
"You are  not a body; you are totally free. You are not a 
body; you are  totally free."This  chant continued all  the 

470 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY

way to the hospital. 

At  the hospital, I had to have an amputation opera­
tion. I cannot take any kind of anesthetic or analgesic, 
so the surgery had to be performed without either of 
them. The  surgeon was a  little  apprehensive  about it, 
but I told him, "Well, I know a way of handling this.You 
just  go  right  ahead." So  I  laid  back and  began to  pro­
foundly surrender and did not resist the pain or label it. 
The  surrender  was  of the  personal  will. As  I  surren­
dered, I had that same profound experience-it was as 
though I was picked up by angelic forces and lifted out 
of the  body  so  gently  and  softly  that  feathers  would 
seem  rough  by  comparison. Although  the  body  was 
there, I no longer experienced it. Instead, I went into a 
state of inftnite and profound peace beyond all descrip­
. tion; it was an inftnite inner joy and happiness that can­
not be described. I remember that, in  my mind, I was 
looking at the thumb or representation of it on a differ­
ent plane and felt happy at its being removed because 
it  symbolized  something  I  wished  to  be  rid  of. What 
could have  been an excruciatingly painful experience 
was instead ecstatic, and there was an exquisite know­
ingness· that  was  surrounded  by inftnite  peace. I  was 
infinitely protected by the love of the universe, by God, 
and by the radiance of Divinity. 

When we look at the dying experience, we see that 
it is a surrendering and letting go. It is a willingness to 
open our heart to be love to others. If we are contem­
plating  dying,  and  if we  are  doing  the  things  I  have 
talked about, in the morning when we get up, we say 
to God, "To those who are dying, I send my conscious­
ness, I send my love and my willingness to be one with 

DEATH  AND  DYING 

471 

them." It is like the forces of the universe then use the 
power of our consciousness  and literally  carries  it to 
the person.At ftrst it will seem like our imagination. It 
will seem like  something that we  are  doing, but after 
we do this a few times, we will suddenly realize that we 
are  not doing  this  any  more, and  that instead, we  are 
sayipg yes  to  its  being done  through us. Because it is 
being done through us, we go into a  state of high joy 
and ecstasy. 

The  fact  that  our  physical  body  is  leaving  is  no 
longer important. I  have  been in those  states where  I 
literally  felt  the  Divine  energy  coming  through  me, 
flowing from the heart area, and going to people who 
were  in  an  automobile  accident.  I  felt  this  profound 
energy go through me and out through the heart. This 
profound sense of loving power bypassed the person­
al self and went down the highway about a mile or so. 
As I drove around the bend in the highway, I wondered 
where  this  energy was  going, and I  saw a  car upside 
down. It had just crashed and its wheels were still spin­
ning. People inside the car were severely injured, and I 
heard them crying out to God. It was as  though I were 
a  traveling  antenna  and  God  used  me  as  an  antenna 
tower to radiate this energy. 

Curiously,  that  same  day,  about  five  miles  farther 
down the highway, it  began again; the  same powerful 
energy  flowed  out  through  me. The  energy  sponta­
neously  radiated  down  the  road  ahead,  and  when  I 
drove  around the  bend, there was  a  second accident; 
another car had just turned over. This time a squad car 
was there, and as  I went past, this energy kept flowing 
backwards to the accident site and continued doing so 

472 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

for  several  miles. Then  it  slowly  came  to  a  stop  as 
though the person had connected with a more infmite 
energy field. This has happened over and over again in 
different locations and circumstances. 

During  those  experiences, I  forgot  I  had  a  body; 
whether  ~t  was  living  or  dying  was  so  irrelevant 
because the joy of the experience was overwhelming. 
There is a willingness to be a servant of God, to forget 
about  the  personal  self,  and  instead  to  allow  one's 
consciousness  and  energy  to  be  used  by  angelic 
forces. Our Infinite Self is  everything. It is connected 
with  the  angelic  realms. When  we  own that  angelic 
condition  within  us,  and  own  that  we  individually 
have the capacity to join it by our willingness to say 
yes, to allow ourselves to surrender to that energy, to 
go to the dead and the dying, we now see that there is 
no such thing as actual death or dying. 

That is why we talked about letting go of the body 
and  saying  farewell  to  it because  life  goes  to  life; life 
never  stops. If it leaves  our body, we  barely  notice  it 
because  we  are  so  busy  being  with  others  that  we 
scarcely notice  that the  physical  body does  not  even 
exist any longer. Beyond the experience of the physical 
body are  experiences that are  difficult to describe, so 
we  prepare  ourselves  for  an  experience  of exquisite 
beauty and peace. 

Appendices 

A:  Map of the Scale of Consciousness 
B:  How to Calibrate the Levels of Consciousness 
C:  References 
D:  About the Author 

475
 
477
 
489
 
493
 

473 

APPENDICES 

475 

APPENDIX  A 

MAP  OF  THE  SCALE  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS 

God-view  Self-view 

Level 

Log 

Emotion 

Process 

Self 

Is 

Enlightenment  700-1,000 

Ineffable 

All-being 

Perfect 

Peace 

One 

Complete 

Loving 

Benign 

Joy 

Love 

Wise 

Meaningful 

Reason 

Merciful 

Harmonious  Acceptance 

Inspiring 

.  Hopeful 

Willingness 

Enabling 

Satisfactory 

Neutrality 

Permitting 

Feasible 

Courage 

600 

540 

500 

400 

350 

310 

250 

200 

Pure 
Consciousness 

illumination 

Bliss 

Serenity 

Transfiguration 

Reverence 

Revelation 

Understanding  Abstraction 

Forgiveness 

Transcendence 

Optimism 

Intention 

Trust 

Release 

Affirmation 

Empowerment 

~ 

LEVELS  OF  TRUTH
 

LEVELS  OF  FALSEHOOD
 

T 

Indifferent  Demanding 

Pride 

Vengeful 

Antagonistic  Anger 

Denying 

Disappointing  Desire 

Punitive 

Frightening 

Fear 

Uncaring 

Tragic 

Grief 

Condemning  Hopeless 

Apathy,  hatred 

Vindictive 

Evil 

Despising 

Hateful 

Guilt 

Shame 

175 

150 

125 

100 

75 

50 

30 

20 

Scorn 

Hate 

Craving 

Anxiety 

Regret 

Inflation 

Aggression 

Enslavement 

Withdrawal 

Despondency 

Despair 

Abdication 

Blame 

Destruction 

Humiliation 

Elimination 

APPENDICES 

477 

APPENDIX  B
 

HOW  TO  CALIBRATE
 
THE  LEVELS  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS
 

- - - - - - -

General Information 

The  energy  field  of  consciousness  is  infmite  in 

dimension.  Specific  levels  correlate  with human  con­
sciousness and have been calibrated from' l' to '1,000'. 
(See Appendix A:  Map  of the Scale  of Consciousness.) 
These energy fields  reflect and dominate  human con­
sciousness. 

Everything  in  the  universe  radiates  a  specific  fre­
quency or minute energy field that remains ill the field 
of consciousness  permanently. Thus,  every  person  or 
being that ever lived and anything about them, includ­
ing  any  event,  thought,  deed,  feeling,  or  attitude,  is 
recorded forever  and can be  retrieved  at  any  time  in 
the present or the future. 

Technique 

The  muscle-testing  response  is  a  simple  "yes"  or 

"not yes" (no) response to a specific stimulus. It is usu­
ally done by the subject holding out an extended arm 
and  the  tester  pressing  down  on  the  wrist  of the 
extended arm, using  two fingers  and light  pressure. 
Usually  the  subject  holds  a  substance  to  be  tested 
over  their  solar  plexus  with  the  other  hand. The 
tester says to the test subject, "Resist," and if the sub­
stance  being  tested  is  beneficial  to  the  subject, the 
arm will be strong. If it is  not beneficial or it has an 
adverse effect, the arm will go weak. The response is 
very quick and brief. 

478 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

It is important to  note  that the intention,  as 
well as both the tester and the one being tested, 
must calibrate over 200 in order to obtain accu­
rate responses. 

Experience  from  online  discussion  groups  has 
shown  that  many  students  obtain  inaccurate  results. 
Further research shows that at calibration 200, there is 
still  a  thirty-percent  chance  of error. Additionally, less 
than  twelve  percent  of the  students  have  consistent 
accuracy, mainly due to unconsciously held positional­
ities Oeffery and Colyer, 2007).The higher the levels of 
consciousness of the test team, the more accurate  are 
the results. The best attitude  is  one  of clinical detach­
ment, posing a statement with the preftx statement, "In 
the name of the highest good, _ _  calibrates as  true. 
Over 100. Over 200;' etc. The contextualization "in the 
highest good" increases accuracy because it transcends 
self-serving personal interest and motives. 

For many years, the test was thought to be a local 

response  of the  body's  acupuncture  or  immune  sys­
tem.  Later  research,  however,  has  revealed  that  the 
response is  not a local response to the body at all, but 
instead is a general response of consciousness itself to 
the energy of a substance or a statement.That which is 
true,  beneftcial,  or  pro-life  gives  a  positive  response 
that stems from the impersonal fteld  of consciousness, 
which  is  present  in  everyone  liVing.  This  positive 
response is  indicated by the body's musculature going 
strong. There  is  also  an  associated  pupillary response 
(the  eyes  dilate with falsity  and  constrict to  truth) as 
well as alterations in brain function as revealed by mag­
netic imaging. (For convenience, the deltoid muscle is 

HOW  TO  CALIBRATE 

479 

usually the one best used as an indicator muscle; how­
ever, any of the muscles of the body can be used.) 

Before a question (in the form of a  statement) 

is  presented,  it is  necessary  to  qualifY  'permis­
sion'; that  is,  state, "I  have  permission  to  ask  about 
what I am holding in mind:' (YeslNo) Or, "This calibra­
tion serves the highest good:' 

If a statement is false or a substance is injurious, the 
muscles go weak: quickly in response to the command, 
"Resist."This indicates the stimulus is negative, untrue, 
anti-life, or the answer is "no:'The response is  fast  and 
brief in  duration. The  body  will  then  rapidly  recover 
and return to normal muscle tension. 

There are three ways of doing the testing. The one 
that is  used  in research  and also  most generally  used 
requires two people: the tester and the test subject. A 
quiet setting is  preferred, with no background music. 
The  test  subject  closes  their  eyes.  The  tester  must 
phrase  the  'question' to  be  asked  in  the form  of a 
statement.  The  statement  can  then  be  answered  as 
"yes" or "no" by the muscle response. For instance, the 
incorrect  form  would  be  to  ask,  "Is  this  a  healthy 
horse?" The  correct  form  is  to  make  the  statement, 
"This  horse  is  healthy;'  or its  corollary, "This  horse  is 
sick." 

After making the statement, the tester says "Resist" 
to  the  test  subject who  is  holding  the  extended  arm 
parallel to the ground.The tester presses down sharply 
with two fingers on the wrist of the extended arm with 
mild  force.  The  test  subject's  arm  will  either  stay 
strong, indicating a "yes;' or go weak, indicating a "not 
yes" (no). The response is short and immediate. 

480 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

-----~ 

A second method is the 'a-ring' method, which can 
be  done  alone. The  thumb  and  middle  finger  of the 
same hand are held tightly in an '0' conftguration, and 
the hooked forefinger of the opposite hand is  used to 
try to pull them apart. There is a noticeable difference 
in  the  strength  between  a  "yes"  and  a  "no"  response 
(Rose,2001). 

The third method is the simplest, yet, like the oth­
ers, requires some practice. Simply lift a heavy object, 
such  as  a  large  dictionary  or  merely  a  couple  of 
bricks, from a table about waist high. Hold in mind an 
image or true statement to be calibrated and then lift. 
Then, for contrast, hold in mind that which is known 
to be false. Note the ease of lifting when truth is held 
in  mind  and  the  greater  effort  necessary  to  lift  the 
load when the issue is false  (not true).The results can 
be verified using the other two methods. 

Calibration of Specific Levels 

The  critical  point between  positive  and  negative, 

between true and false, or between that which is con­
structive or destructive, is at the calibrated level of 200 
(see Map in Appendix A). Anything above 200, or true, 
makes  the  subject go  strong; anything  below  200, or 
false, allows the arm to go weak. 

Anything past or present, including images or state­
ments, historical events, or personages, can be tested. 
They need not be verbalized. 

Numerical Calibration 

Example:  "Ramana  Maharshi  teachings  calibrate 
over 700." (YIN). Or, "Hitler calibrated over 200." (YIN) 

, 
1 
I 
I 

! 

HOW  TO  CALIBR,ATE 

481 

"When he was  in his  20s." (YIN) "His  30s." (YIN) "His 
40s:' (YIN) "At the time of his death." (YIN) 

Applications 

The muscle test cannot be used to foretell the future; 
otherwise, there are no limits as to what can be asked. 
Consciousness has no limits in time or space; however, 
permission  may  be  denied.  All  current  or  historical 
events  are  available  for  questioning. The  answers  are 
impersonal and do not depend on the belief systems of 
either the tester or the test subject. For example, proto­
plasm  recoils  from  noxious  stimuli  and  flesh  bleeds. 
Those  are  the  qualities  of these  test  materials  and  are 
impersonal.  Consciousness  actually  knows  only  truth 
because  only  truth  has  actual  existence.  It  does  not 
respond to falsehood  because falsehood  does not have 
existence in Reality. It will also not respond accurately to 
nonintegrous or egoistical questions. 

Accurately speaking, the test response is  either an 
'on'response  or merely  a  'not  on' response. Like  the 
electrical  switch,  we  say  the  electricity  is  "on;'  and 
when we use the term "off;' we just mean that it is not 
there. In reality, there is no such thing as 'off-ness'. This 
is a  subtle statement but crucial to the understanding 
of the nature of.consciousness. Consciousness is capa­
ble of recognizing only Truth. It merely fails to respond 
to falsehood. Similarly, a mirror reflects an image only if 
there is  an object to reflect. If no object is  present to 
the mirror, there is no reflected image. 

To Calibrate A Level 

Calibrated levels are relative to a  specific reference 

482 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

from  1 

scale. To  arrive  at  the  same figures  as  in  the  chart  in 
Appendix A, reference must be made to that table or by 
a  statement such as, "On a  scale of human  conscious­
ness 
indicates 
Enlightenment,  this  __  calibrates  over  __  (a 
number)." Or, "On a  scale of consciousness where 200 
is  the level  of Truth  and  500 is  the  level  of Love,  this 
statement calibrates over __."  (State a specific num­
ber.) 

to  1,000,  where  600 

General Information 

People  generally  want  to  determine  truth  from 
falsehood. Therefore,  the  statement  has  to  be  made 
very  specifically. Avoid  using  general  terms  such  as  a 
'good' job to apply for. 'Good' in what way?  Pay  scale? 
Working  conditions?  Promotional  opportunities? 
Fairness of the boss? 

Expertise 

Familiarity with the test brings  progressive  exper­

tise. The 'right' questions  to ask  begin  to  spring forth 
and can become almost uncannily accurate. If the same 
tester and  test  subject work  together for  a  period  of 
time,  one  or  both  of  them  will  develop  what  can 
become  an  amazing  accuracy  and  capability  of  pin­
pointing  just  what  specific  questions  to  ask,  even 
though the  subject is  totally unknown  by either one. 
For instance, the tester has lost an object and begins by 
saying, "{  left it in my office." (Answer: No.) "{  left it in 
the car." (Answer: No.) All  of a  sudden, the test subject 
almost 'sees' the object and says, "Ask, 'On the back of 
the bathroom door.''' The test subject says, "The object 

HOW  TO  CALIBRATE 

483 

is hanging on the back of the bathroom door." (Answer: 
Yes.)  In this  actual case, the test subject did not even 
know that the  tester had  stopped for  gas  and left  a 
jacket in the restroom of a gasoline station. 

Any  information  can  be  obtained  about  anything 
anywhere in current or past time or space, depending 
on receiving prior permission. (Sometimes  one gets  a 
"no," perhaps  for  karmic  or other unknown  reasons.) 
By  cross-ehecking, accuracy can be  easily  confirmed. 
For  anyone  who learns  the  technique, more  informa­
tion is available instantaneously than can be held in all 
the computers and libraries of the world. The possibil­
ities  are  therefore  obviously  unlimited,  and  the 
prospects breathtaking. 

Limitations 

The test is accurate only if the test subjects them­
selves calibrate over 200 and the intention for the use 
of the test is integrous and also calibrates over 200.The 
requirement is  one  of detached objectivity  and  align­
ment with truth rather than subjective  opinion. Thus, 
to try to 'prove  a  point' negates  accuracy. Sometimes 
married  couples, for  reasons  as  yet  undiscovered, are 
unable to use each other as test subjects and may have 
to find a third person to be a test partner. 

A suitable test subject is  a person whose arm goes 
strong when a  love  object or person is  held in mind, 
and it goes weak if that which is  negative (fear, hate, 
guilt,  etc.)  is  held  in  mind  (e.g., Winston  Churchill 
makes  one  go  strong,  and  bin  Laden  makes  one  go 
weak). 

Occasionally, a suitable test subject gives paradoxical 

484 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

responses. This  can  usually  be  cleared  by  doing  the 
'thymic thump'. (With a closed fist, thump three times 
over  the  upper  breastbone,· smile,  and  say "ha-ha-ha" 
with  each  thump  and  mentally  picture  someone  or 
something that is loved.) The temporary imbalance will 
then clear up. 

The imbalance may be the result of recently having 
been  with  negative  people,  listening  to  heavy-metal 
rock music, watching violent television programs, play­
ing violent video games, etc. Negative music energy has 
a  deleterious effect on the energy system of the body 
for up to one-half hour after it is turned off. Television 
commercials or background are also a common source 
of negative energy. 

As  previously  noted,  this  method  of  discerning 
truth from falsehood and the calibrated levels of truth 
has strict requirements. Because of the limitations, cali­
brated levels are  supplied for  ready reference  in prior 
books, and extensively in Truth vs. Falsehood. 

Explanation 

The muscle-strength test is independent of personal 
opinion or beliefs and is an impersonal response of the
 
. field of consciousness, just as protoplasm is  impersonal
 
in its responses.This can be demonstrated by the obser­
vation  that  the  test  responses  are  the  same  whether
 
verbalized or held silently in mind. Thus, the test sub­
ject is  not influenced by the  question as  they do  not
 
even know what it is. To  demonstrate  this, do the fol­
lowing exercise: 

The tester holds in mind an image unknown to the 
test subject and states,"The image I am holding in mind 







__ __ ____H_OW  TO  CA =-L.=..I-=--B-=--R:-Ae-T_E 

_ 

485 

I 

is  positive"  (or  "true,"  or "calibrates  over  200;'  etc.). 
Upon direction, the test subject then resists the down­
ward pressure on the wrist. If the tester holds a  posi­
tive  image  in  mind  (e.g.,  Abraham  lincoln,  Jesus, 
Mother Teresa, etc.), the test subject's arm muscle will 
go strong. If the tester holds a false  statement or nega­
tive image in mind (e.g., bin Laden, Hitler, etc.), the arm 
will  go  weak. Inasmuch  as  the  test  subject  does  not 
know what the tester has in mind, the results are not 
influenced by personal beliefs. 

Disqualification 

Both skepticism (cal. 160) and cynicism, as well as 

atheism, calibrate below 200 because they reflect neg­
ative prejudgment. In contrast, true inquiry requires an 
open  mind  and  honesty devoid  of intellectual vanity. 
Negative  studies  of the  testing  methodology  all cali­
brate below 200 (usually at 160), as do the investigators 
themselves. 

That even famous  professors can  and do  calibrate 
below 200 may seem surprising to the average person. 
Thus, negative  studies are  a  consequence  of negative 
bias.As an example, Francis Crick's research design that 
led to the discovery of the double helix pattern of DNA 
calibrated at 440. His  last  research  design, which was 
intended to prove that consciousness was just a  prod­
uct of neuronal activity, calibrated at only 135. (He was 
an atheist.) 

The failure  of investigators who themselves, or by 
faulty research design, calibrate below 200 (all calibrate 
at approximately  160), confirms the truth of the very 
methodology they claim to disprove. They 'should' get 

486 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

negative  results,  and  so  they  do, which paradoxically 
proves the accuracy of the test to detect the difference 
between unbiased integrity and nonintegrity. 

Any new discovery may upset the apple cart and be 
viewed as a threat to the status quo of prevailing belief 
systems.That consciousness research validates spiritual 
Reality is, of course, going to precipitate resistance, as 
it is  actually a direct confrontation to the dominion of 
the narcissistic core of the ego itself, which is innately 
presumptuous and opinionated. 

Below consciousness  level  200, comprehension is 
limited  by  the  dominance  of Lower  Mind,  which  is 
capable of recognizing facts  but not yet able  to grasp 
what is meant by the term 'truth' (it confuses res interna 
with  res  externa),  and  that  truth  has  physiological 
accompaniments  that  are  different  from  falsehood. 
Additionally, truth is intuited as evidenced by the use of 
voice  analysis,  the  study  of  body  language,  pupillary 
response,  EEG  changes  in  the  brain,  fluctuations  in 
breathing and blood pressure, galvanic  skin response, 
dowsing, and  even  the  Huna  technique  of measuring 
the distance that the aura radiates from the body. Some 
people have  a  very simple  technique  that  utilizes  the 
standing body like a pendulum (fall forward with truth 
and backward with falsehood). 

From a more advanced contextualization, the prin­
ciples that prevail are that Truth cannot be disproved 
by falsehood any more than light can be disproved by 
darkness. The  nonlinear is  not  subject  to  the  limita­
tions of the linear. Truth is a  paradigm different from 
logic and thus is  not 'provable', as  that which is  prov­
able calibrates only in the 400s. Consciousness research 

HOW  TO  CALIBRATE 

487 

methodology  operates  at  It';vel  600,  which  is  at  the 
interface of the linear and the nonlinear dimensions. 

Discrepancies 

Differing calibrations may be obtained over time or 

by different investigators for a variety of reasons: 
1.	  Situations,  people,  politics,  policies,  and  attitudes 

change over time. 

2.	  People  tend  to  use  different  sensory  modalities 
when they hold something in mind, i.e., visual, sen­
sory, auditory, or feeling. 'Your mother' could there­
fore be how she looked, felt, sounded, etc., or Henry 
Ford could be calibrated as a father, as an industrial­
ist, for his impact on America, his anti-Semitism, etc. 
3.	  Accuracy increases with the level of consciousness. 

(The 400s and above are the most accurate.) 
One  can  specify  context  and  stick  to  a  prevailing 
modality. The same team using the same technique 
will  get  results  that  are  internally  consistent. 
Expertise  develops  with  practice. There  are  some 
people, however, who are incapable of a  scientific, 
detached  attitude  and  are  unable  to  be  objective, 
and for whom the testing method will therefore not 
be accurate. Dedication and intention to the truth 
has to be given priority over personal opinions and 
trying to prove them as being "right." 

Note 

While  it  was  discovered  that  the  technique  does 
not work for  people  who  calibrate  at  less  than  level 
200, only quite recently was it further discovered that 
the technique does not work if the persons doing the 

488 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

testing  are  atheists. This  may  be  simply  the  conse­
quence of the fact that atheism calibrates below level 
200, and that negation of the truth or Divinity (omni­
science) karmically disqualifies the negator just as hate 
negates love. 

Also  recently discovered was  that the capacity for 
accuracy of consciousness calibration testing increases 
the  higher  the  level  of consciousness  of the  testers. 
People in the range of the high 400s and above get the 
most reliably accurate  test results Oeffrey and  Colyer, 
2007). 

REFEREN_C_E_S 

__ 

489 

APPENDIX  C 

REFERENCES 

A  Course in Miracles. (1975) 1996. Mill Valley, Calif.: Foundation for Inner 

Peace. 

Benoit,  H.  1990.  Zen  and  the  Psychology  of  Transformation:  The 

Supreme Doctrine.  Rochester, Vennont: Inner Traditions. 

Berne, E.  1964. Games People Play. New York: Grove Press. 
Bristow, D., G. Rees, et al. 2005. "Brain Suppresses Awareness of Blinking." 
(University  College,  London,  Institute  of  Neurology,  pUblished  in 

Current Biology, 25 July. 

Diamond,]. 1979. Behavioral Kinesiology. New York: Harper &  Rowe. 

-.1979. Your Body Doesn't Lie. New York: Warner Books. 
Duffy,William. 19S6. Sugar Blues. NewYork: Grand Central Publishing Co. 
Great Books of the Western World,  The. 1952. Hutching, R. and M.AIden, 

Eels. Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica. 

Hawkins, D. R. 2ooSa. Reality, Spirituality,  and Modern Man. Sedona,AZ: 

Veritas Publishing. 

- . 200Sb. In the World but not of It: Living Spiritually in the Modern 

World. (Six CD  set) Niles, IL: Nightingale-Conant. 

-

- .  lOOSc. "Advancing  Spiritual Awareness" Lecture  Series.  Sedona,AZ: 
Veritas Publishing. (Six  5-hour CD/DVDs.) Spirituality, Reason, and 
Faith  (Jan.); Clear Pathway  to  Enlightenment (Mar.); Belief, Trust, 
and  Credibility  (June);Overcoming  DOUbt,  Skepticism  and 
Disbelief  (Aug.);  Practical  Spirituality  (Oct.);  and,  Freedom: 
Morality and Ethics (Nov.). 
2007a. Discovery  of the  Presence  of God: Devotional  Nonduality. 
Sedona.AZ:Veritas Publishing. 
2007b. The Discovery: Revealing the Presence  of God  in Your Life. 
(Six CD  set.) Niles,IL: Nightingale-Conant. 
2007c."Spiritual Reality and Modern Man" Lecture Series. Sedona,AZ: 
Veritas Publishing. (Nine 5-hour CD/DVDs.) God vs. Science: Limits 
of the  Mind (Feb.); Relativism  vs.  Reality  (April);  What is "Real"? 
(June); What is "Truth"? (July);1be Human Dilemma (Aug.);Review 
of the Work (Sept.); Creation vs. Evolution (Oct.); SpiritualSurvival' 
Realization of Reality (Nov.); and, Experiential Reality: The Mystic 
(Dec.) 

-

-

490 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2006a. Transcending  the  Levels  of Consciousness.  Sedona. AZ: 
Veritas  Publishing. 
2006b. "Transcending  the  Levels  of Consciousness" Lecture  Series. 
Sedona, AZ: Veritas  Publishing. (Six  5-hour CD/DVDs.) Experientia{ 
Reality  (Feb.);  Perception  vs.  Essem:e  (April);  Spiritual  Trutb  vs. 
Spiritual Fantasy (June); Reason vs. Trutb (Aug.); Spiritual Practice 
and Daily Life (Oct.); and, Is  tbe Miraculous Real? (Dec.) 
2006c. Trutb vs. Falsehood. (Six CD set.) Niles, IL: Nightingale-Conant. 

2006d. "Paradigm Blindness: Academic vs. Clinical  Medicine.':Journal 
of Orthomolecular Medicine, 21:4, 4 November. 
2005a. Truth  vs. Falsehood: How to Tell the Difference. Toronto:Axial 
Publishing. 
2005b. The  Highest Level of Enlightenment. (Six CD  set.)  Niles, IL: 
Nightingale-Conant Corp. 
2005c. "Devotional  Nonduality"  Lecture  Series.  Sedona,AZ:  Veritas 
Publishing. (Eleven 5-hour CD/DVDs.) Vision (February);Alignment 
(April); Intention  (May); Transcending  Barriers (June); Conviction 
(July); Serenity  (August);  T,Jpnscending  Ohstacles (Sept.); Spiritual 
Traps  (October);  Valid  Teacbers/Teacbings  (Nov.);  and,  God, 
Religion,  &  Spirituality (D¢c.) 

2004a. "The Science of Peace." Awakened World,].A.G.N.T., 6:3. 

2004b. "Nonduality: Consciousness Research and tbe  Truth  of the 
Buddha." Rourkee, India: Indian Institute ofTechnology. 
2004c. "The Impact of Spontaneous Spiritual Experiences in the Life 
of 'Ordinary' Persons." Watkins Review, 7. 
2004d. "Transcending  the  Mind  "Lecture  Series.  Sedona, AZ: Veritas 
Publishing.  (Six  5-hour  CD/DVDs.)  Thought  and  Ideation  (Feb.); 
Emotions  and  Sensations  (April);  Perception  and  Positionality 
(June);  Identification  and  Illusion  (August);  Witnessing  and 
Observing (Oct.); and Tbe Ego and tbe Self (Dec.). 
2003a. l'Reality and Subjectivity. Sedona,AZ:Veritas Publishing. 

2003b. "Devotional  Nonduality  "Lecture  Series.  Sedona, AZ:  Veritas 
Publishing. (Six  5-hour CD/DVDs.)  Integration  of Spirituality  and 
Personal  Life  (Feb.);  Spirituality  and the  World  (April);  Spiritual 
Community (June); Enligbtenment (August); Realization oftbe Self 
as tbe '7"  (Nov.); and, Dialogue,  Questions andAnswers (Dec.). 
2002a. Power  versus  Force: An Anatomy Of Consciousness.  (Rev.). 
Carlsbad, CA; Brighton-le-Sands,Australia: Hay House. 

REFERENCES 

491 

2002b. "The  Pathway  to  God"  Lecture  Series.  Sedona,  AZ:  Veritas 
Publishing.  (I'welve  5-hour  CD/DVDs)  1.  Causality:  The  Ego's 
Foundation;  2.  Radical  Subjectivity:  The  I  of Self;  3.  Levels  of 
Consciousness:  Subjective  and  Social  Consequences;  4. 
Positionality  and  Duality:  Transcending 
the  Opposites;  5. 
Perception and Illusion: the Distortions ofReality; 6. Realizing the 
Root of Consciousness: Meditative and Contemplative Techniques; 
7.  The Nature of Divinity: Undoing Religious Fallacies; 8. Advaita:
 
The  'Way  to  God  Through  Mind;  9.  Devotion:  The  Way  to' God
 
Through  the  Heart;  10.  Karma  and  the  Afterlife;  11.  God
 
Transcendent and Immanent; and,  12. Realization of the Self: The
 
Final Moments.
 
2001. The Eye  of the L' From Which Nothing Is Hidden. Sedona,AZ:
 
Veritas Publishing.
 
2000a.  Consciousness  Workshop.  Prescott,  AZ  Sedona, AZ:  Veritas
 
Publishing. (CD/DVD)
 

2000b. Consciousness andA Course in Miracles. (California.) Sedona,
 
AZ:Veritas Publishing. (CD)
 
2000c.  Consciousness  and  Spiritual  InqUiry: Address  to  the  Tao
 
Fellowship. Sedona,AZ:Veritas Publishing. (CD)
 
1997. Research on the Nature of Consciousness. Sedona,AZ:Veritas
 
Publishing.  (The  Landsberg  1997  Lecture.  University  of California
 
School of Medicine, San Francisco, CN 
1996. "Realization of the Presence of God." Concepts. July, 17-18. 

1995. Power  vs.  Force: An Anatomy of Consciousness.  Sedona, AZ: 
Veritas Publishing. 
1995. Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis and Calibration of the 
Levels  of Human  Consciousness. Ann Arbor,  Mich.: VMl,  Bell  and 
Howell Col.; republished 1996 by Veritas Publishing, Sedona,AZ 
1995. Power Versus  Force; Consci0rmess and Addiction;Advanced 
States  of Consciousness: The  Realization  of the  Presence  of God; 
Consciousness: How to Tell the Truth AboutAnything, and Undoing 
the  Barriers  to  Spiritual  Progress.  Sedona, AZ: Veritas  Publishing. 
(CD/DVDs.) 
1987. Sedona Lecture Series: Drug Addiction and Alcoholism;A Map 
of Consciousness; Cancer;AIDS; and Death and Dying.  Sedona, AZ: 
Veritas Publishing. (CDs, DVDs.) 
1986. Office  Series: Stress; Health; Spiritual First Aid; Sexuality; The 
Aging  Process; Handling  Major  Crisis; Worry;  Fear  and Anxiety; 

-

492 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

-

Pain  and  Suffering;  Losing  Weight;  Depression;  Illness  and  Self­
Healing; and Alcoholism. Sedona,AZ:Veritas Publishing.(CDsIDVDs.) 
1985. "Consciousness  and Addiction" in Beyond Addictions,  Beyond 
Boundaries.  S.  Burton  and  1.  Kiley.  San  Mateo,  CA:  Brookridge 
Institute. 

Hawkins,  D.  R.,  and  1. Pauling.  1973.  Orthomolecular  Psychiatry.  New 

York:W H. Freeman and Co.. 

Kubler-Ross, E.  1997. On Death and Dying,  NewYork: Scribner. 
tibet, B., et at.  1999.Article in Brain 106,623-42. 
Sadlier, S.  2000. Looking for  God: A  Searcher's  Guide  to  Religious and 

Spiritual Groups of the World. New York:: Perigee Trade. 

Stapp,  H.  2007.  Mindful  Universe:  Quantum  Mechanics  and  the 
Participating Observer. NewYork: Springer-Verlag Publishing. 
Warren, R. 2002. The Purpose Driven Life:What on Earth Am I Here For? 

Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan. 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

493 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR
 

Biographical and Autobiographical Notes 

Dr.  Hawkins  is  an  internationally  known  spiritual 
teacher, author, and speaker on the subject of advanced 
spiritual  states,  consciousness  research,  and  the 
Realization of the Presence of God as  Self. 

His  published works, as  well as  recorded lectures, 
have  been widely recognized as  unique in that a very 
advanced  state  of spiritual  awareness  occurred  in  an 
individual  with  a  scientific  and  clinical. background 
who  was  later  able  to  verbalize  and  explain  the 
unusual phenomenon  in  a  manner  that  is  clear  and 
comprehensible. 

The transition from the normal ego-state of mind to 

its elimination by the Presence is  described in the tril­
ogy  Power  vs.  Force  (1995)  which  won  praise  even 
from  Mother Teresa,  The  Eye  of the  I  (2001),  and l' 
Reality  and  Subjectivity  (2003),  which  have  been 
translated into the major languages of the world. Truth 
vs.  Falsehood:  How  to  Tell  the  Difference  (2005), 
Transcending  the  Levels  of Consciousness  (2006), 
Discovery  of  the  Presence  of  God:  Devotional 
Nonduality  (2007),  and  Reality,  Spirituality  and 
Modern Man  (2008)  continue  the  exploration of the 
ego's  expressions  and  inherent limitations  and how 
to transcend them. 

The  trilogy  was  preceded  by  research  on  the 
Nature of Consciousness and published as the doctoral 
dissertation,  Qualitative  and  Quantitative  Analysis 

494 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the  Levels  of  Human 
and  Calibration  of 
Consciousness (1995), wWch correlated the seemingly 
disparate  domains of science and spirituality. This was 
accomplished  by the  major discovery  of a  technique 
that, for the fIrst time in human Wstory, demonstrated a 
means to discern truth from falsehood. 

The importance of the initial work was given recog­
nition  by  its  very  favorable  and  extensive  review  in 
Brain/Mind Bulletin and at later presentations such as 
the  International  Conference  on  Science  and 
Consciousness.  Many  presentations  were  given  to  a 
variety  of organizations, spiritual  conferences, church 
groups, nuns, and monks, both nationally and in foreign 
countries, including the  Oxford Forum in  England. In 
the Far East, Dr. Hawkins is a recognized "Teacher of the 
Way to Enlightenment" ("Tae Ryoung Sun Kak Dosa"). 
In response  to  his  observation that much spiritual 
truth  has  been  misunderstood  over  the  ages  due  to 
lack of explanation, Dr. Hawkins has presented monthly 
seminars that provide detailed explanations wWch are 
too lengthy to describe in book format. Recordings are 
available  that  end  with  questions  and  answers,  thus 
providing additional clarifIcation. 

The overall design of tWs lifetime work is to recon­
textualize the human experience in terms of the evolu­
tion  of consciousness  and  to  integrate  a  comprehen­
sion  of  both  mind  and  spirit  as  expressions  of the 
innate DiVinity that is the substrate and ongoing source 
of life and Existence. This dedication is signifIed by the 
statement  "Gloria  in  Excelsis  Deol"  with  wWch  Ws 
published works begin and end. 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

495 

Biographic Summary 

Dr.  Hawkins  has  practiced  psychiatry  since  1952 
and  is  a  life  member  of  the  American  Psychiatric 
Association and numerous other professional organiza­
tions. His  national television appearance schedule has 
included The McNeil/Leher News Hour,  The  Barbara 
Walters  Show,  The  Today  Show,  science  documen­
taries, and  many  others.  He  was  also  interviewed  by 
Oprah Winfrey. 

He is the author of numerous scientific and spiritual 
publications,  books,  CDs,  DVDs,  and  lecture  series. 
Nobelist Linus Pauling coauthored his landmark book, 
Orthomolecular  Psychiatry.  Dr.  Hawkins  was  a  con­
sultant  for  many  years  to  Episcopal  and  Catholic 
Dioceses, monastic orders, and other religions orders. 
Dr. Hawkins has lectured widely, with appearances 
at Westminster Abbey,  the  Universities  of Argentina, 
Notre  Dame,  and  Michigan;  Fordham  University  and 
Harvard University; and the Oxford Forum in England. 
He gave the annual Landsberg Lecture at the University 
of California Medical School at San Francisco. He is also 
a  consultant  to foreign  governments  on international 
diplomacy  and  was  instrumental  in  resolving  long­
standing  conflicts  that  were  major  threats  to  world 
peace. 

In recognition of his  contributions to  humanity, in 
1995, Dr.  Hawkins  became  a  knight  of the  Sovereign 
Order  of  the  Hospitaliers  of  St.  John  of Jerusalem, 
which was founded in 1077. 

Autobiographic Note 

While the truths reported in this book were scien­

496 

tifically  derived  and  objectively  organized,  like  all 
truths, they  were  ftrst  experienced  personally. A  life­
long sequence of intense states of awareness beginning 
at a young age ftrst inspired and then gave direction to 
the  process  of  subjective  realization  that  has  finally 
taken form in this series of books. 

At  age  three,  there  occurred  a  sudden  full  con­
sciousness  of  existence,  a  nonverbal  but  complete 
understanding  of  the  meaning  of  "I  Am,"  followed 
immediately  by  the  frightening  realization  that  "I" 
"might not have come into existence at all. This was an 
instant  awakening  from  oblivion· into  a  conscious 
awareness, and in that moment, the  personal self was 
born and the duality of"Is" and "Is Not" entered my sub­
jective awareness. 

Throughout childhood  and  early  adolescence, the 
paradox of existence and the question of the reality of 
the self remained a repeated concern.The personal self 
would  sometimes  begin  slipping  back  into  a  greater 
impersonal Self, and the initial fear of non-existence­
the fundamental fear of nothingness-would recur. 

In 1939, as a paperboy with a seventeen-mile bicy­
cle route in rural Wisconsin, on a dark winter's night I 
was  caught  miles  from  home  in  a  twenty-below-zero 
blizzard. The bicycle fell over on the ice and the fterce 
wind ripped the newspapers out of the handlebar bas­
ket, blowing them across the ice-covered, snowy field. 
There were tears of frustration and exhaustion and my 
clothes were frozen stiff.To get out of the wind, I broke 
through the icy  crust of a  high snow bank, dug out a 
space, and crawled into it. Soon the shivering stopped 
and there was a delicious warmth, and then a state of 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

497 

peace  beyond  all  description. This  was  accompanied 
by a  suffusion  of light  and a  presence  of inftnite  love 
that had no beginning and no end and was undifferen­
tiated  from  my  own  essence. The  physical  body  and 
surroundings  faded  as  my  awareness  was fused  with 
this all-present, illuminated state.The mind grew silent; 
all  thought stopped. An  inftnite  Presence was  all  that 
was or could be, beyond all time or description. 

After  that  timelessness,  there  was  suddenly  an 
awareness  of  someone  shaking  my  knee;  then  my 
father's  anxious face  appeared. There was great reluc­
tance  to return to the  body and all  that that entailed, 
but because of my father's love and anguish, the Spirit 
nurtured and reactivated the body. There was compas­
sion for his fear of death, although, at the same time, the 
concept of death seemed absurd. 

This subjective experience was not discussed with 
anyone  since  there  was  no  context  available  from 
which  to  describe  it.  It  was  not  common  to  hear  of 
spiritual experiences other than those reported in the 
lives of the saints. But after this experience, the accepted 
reality of the world began to  seem only provisional; 
traditional  religious  teachings  lost  signiftcance  and, 
paradoxically, I became an agnostic. Compared to the 
light of Divinity that had illuminated all  existence, the 
god of traditional religion shone dully indeed; thus spiri­
tuality replaced religion. 

During  World  War  II,  hazardous  duty  on  a 
minesweeper often brought close brushes with death, 
but there was no fear of it. It was as though death had 
lost  its  authenticity. After  the  war,  fascinated  by  the 
complexities of the mind and wanting to study psychi­

498 

HEALING  AND  RECOVE_R_Y 

_ 

atry,  I  worked  my  way  through  medical  school.  My 
training  psychoanalyst,  a  professor  at  Columbia 
University, was  also  an  agnostic; we  both  took  a  dim 
view  of  religion. The  analysis  went  well,  as  did  my 
career, and success followed. 

I  did  not, however, settle  quietly into  professional 
life. I fell ill with a progressive, fatal  illness that did not 
respond to any treatments available. By age thirty-eight, 
I was in extremis and knew I was about to die. I didn't 
care  about  the  body,  but  my  spirit  was  in  a  state  of 
extreme  anguish  and  despair.  As  the  fmal  moment 
approached,  the  thought  flashed  through  my  mind, 
"What if there  is  a  God?" So  I  called out in prayer, "If 
there is a God, I ask him to help me now." I surrendered 
to whatever God there might  be and went into  obliv­
ion. When I awoke, a transformation of such enormity 
had taken place that I was struck dumb with awe. 

The person I had been no longer existed.There was 
no  personal  self or  ego,  only  an  Infinite  Presence  of 
such  unlimited  power  that  it  was  all  that  was. This 
Presence  had  replaced  what  had  been 'me',  and  the 
body  and  its  actions  were  controlled  solely  by  the 
Infinite Will of the Presence.The world was illuminated 
by  the  clarity  of an  Infinite  Oneness  that  expressed 
itself as all things revealed in their infinite  beauty and 
perfection. 

As  life  went  on, this stillness  persisted. There  was 

no personal will; the physical body went about its busi­
ness under the direction of the infInitely powerful but 
exquisitely  gentle Will  of the  Presence. In  that  state, 
there  was  no  need to  think about  anything. All  truth 
was self-evident and no  conceptualization was neces­

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

499 

sary  or  even possible. At  the  same  time, the  physical 
nervous system felt  extremely overtaxed, as though it 
were  carrying  far  more  energy  than  its  circuits  had 
been designed for. 

It was  not possible  to  function  effectively in the 
world.  All  ordinary  motivations  had  disappeared, 
along with all  fear and anxiety. There was nothing to 
seek,  as  all  was  perfect.  Fame,  success,  and  money 
were meaningless. Friends urged the pragmatic return 
to clinical practice, but there was no ordinary motiva­
tion to do so. 

There was  now the  ability  to  perceive the  reality 
that  underlay  personalities:  the  origin  of  emotional 
sickness lay in people's belief that they were their per­
sonalities.And so, as though of its  own, a clinical prac­
tice resumed and eventually became huge. 

People  came  from  all  over  the  United  States. The 
practice had two thousand outpatients, which required 
more than f:tfty  therapists and other employees, a suite 
of  twenty-five  offices,  and  research  and  electroen­
cephalic  laboratories.  There  were  a  thousand  new 
patients a year. In addition, there were appearances on 
radio and network television shows, as previously men­
tioned. In 1973, the clinical research was documented 
in  a  traditional  format  in  the  book,  Orthomolecular 
Psychiatry. This work was  ten years  ahead of its  time 
and created something of a stir. 

The  overall  condition  of  the  nervous  system 

improved slowly, and then another phenomenon com­
menced. There was a  sweet, delicious  band of energy 
continuously flOWing  up the  spine and into the  brain 
where  it  created  an  intense  sensation  of continuous 

500 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

pleasure. Everything in life happened by synchronicity, 
evolving in perfect harmony; the miraculous was com­
monplace.The origin of what the world would call mir­
acles  was  the  Presence,  not  the  personal  self. What 
remained  of the  personal 'me' was  only  a  witness  to 
these phenomena. The greater '1', deeper than my for­
mer self or thoughts, determined all that happened. 

The states that were present had been reported by 
others throughout history and led to the investigation 
of spiritual  teachings, including those of the  Buddha, 
enlightened sages, Huang Po, and more recent teachers 
such as  Ramana Maharshi and Nisargadatta Maharaj. It 
was  thus  confirmed that these  experiences were  not 
unique.  The  Bhagavad-Gita  now  made  complete 
sense. At  times, the same spiritual ecstasy reported by 
Sri Rama Krishna and the Christian saints occurred. 

Everything  and  everyone  in  the  world  was  lumi­
nous and exquisitely beautiful.Al1living beings became 
Radiant  and  expressed  this  Radiance  in  stillness  and 
splendor. It was  apparent that  all  mankind is  actually 
motivated  by  inner  love  but  has  simply  become 
unaware;  most  lives  are  lived  as  though  by  sleepers 
unawakened to  the awareness of who they really are. 
People around me looked as though they were asleep 
and were incredibly beautiful. It was like being in love 
with everyone. 

It was  necessary  to  stop  the  habitual  practice  of 
meditating for an hour in the morning and then again 
before  dinner because  it would  intensify  the  bliss  to 
such an extent that it was not possible to function. An 
experience similar to the one that had occurred in the 
snow bank as a boy would recur, and it became increas­

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

- - -

501 

ingly  difficult  to  leave  that  state  and  return  to  the 
world.The incredible beauty of all things shone forth in 
all their perfection, and. where the world saw ugliness, 
there was only timeless beauty. This  spiritual love  suf­
fused  all  perception, and all  boundaries between here 
and there, or then and now, or separation disappeared. 
During the years spent in inner silence, the strength of 
the Presence grew. Life  was no longer personal; a per­
sonal  will  no  longer  existed.  The  personal  'I'  had 
become  an  instrument  of the  Infinite  Presence  and 
went  about  and  did  as  it  was  willed.  People  felt  an 
extraordinary  peace  in  the  aura  of  that  Presence. 
Seekers sought answers but as there was no longer any 
such individual  as  DaVid,  they were  actually finessing 
answers from  their own Self, which was not different 
from mine. From each person the same Self shone forth 
from their eyes. 

The  miraculous  happened, beyond  ordinary  com­
prehension.  Many  chronic  maladies  from  which  the 
body had suffered for years disappeared; eyesight spon­
taneously normalized, and there was no longer a  need 
for the lifetime bifocals. 

Occasionally,  an  exquisitely  blissful  energy,  an 
Infinite Love, would suddenly begin to radiate from the 
heart toward the scene of some calamity. Once, while 
driVing  on a  highway, this  exquisite  energy  began  to 
beam out of the chest.As the car rounded a bend, there 
was an auto accident; the wheels of the overturned car 
were still spinning.The energy passed with great inten­
sity into the occupants of the car and then stopped of 
its own accord. Another time, while I  was walking on 
the streets of a strange City, the energy started to flow 

502 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

- - - - -

down the  block ahead  and  arrived  at the  scene of an 
incipient  gang  fight.  The  combatants  fell  back  and 
began to laugh, and again, the energy stopped. 

Profound  changes  of  perception  came  without 
warning  in  improbable  circumstances. While  dining 
alone  at Rothman's  on Long  Island, the  Presence  sud­
denly  intensified  until  every  thing  and  every person, 
which  had  appeared  as  separate  in  ordinary  percep­
tion, melted into a timeless universality and oneness. In 
the  motionless  Silence,  it  became  obvious  that  there 
are no 'events' or 'things' and that nothing actually'hap­
pens' because past, present, and future  are merely arti­
facts  of perception, as  is  the illusion  of a  separate  'I' 
being subject  to  birth  and  death. As  the limited, false 
self dissolved into the universal Self of its true  origin, 
there was an ineffable sense of haVing  returned home 
to a state of absolute peace and relief from all suffering. 
It is  only the illusion of individuality that is  the origin 
of all  suffering. When one  realizes that one is the uni­
verse,  complete  and  at  one  with All  That  Is,  forever 
without end, then no further suffering is possible. 

Patients came from every country in the world, and 
some  were  the  most  hopeless  of  the  hopeless. 
Grotesque, writhing, wrapped in wet sheets for  trans­
port  from  far-away  hospitals  they  came,  hoping  for 
treatment for advanced psychoses and grave, incurable 
mental disorders. Some were catatonic; many had been 
mute for  years. But in each patient, beneath the crip­
pled appearance, there was the shining essence of love 
and beauty, perhaps so obscured to ordinary vision that 
he or she had become totally unloved in this world. 

One day a mute catatonic was brought into the hos­

I

• 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

503 

pital in a straitjacket. She had a severe neurological dis­
order and was unable to stand. Squirming on the floor, 
she went into spasms and her eyes rolled back in her 
head. Her hair was matted; she had torn all her clothes 
and  uttered  guttural  sounds.  Her  family  was  fairly 
wealthy; as  a  result, over the years  she  had been seen 
by innumerable physicians and famous specialists from 
all over the world. Every treatment had been tried on 
her  and  she  had  been  given  up  as  hopeless  by  the 
medical profession. 

A  short,  nonverbal  question  arose: "What  do  you 
want done with  her, God?" Then came the realization 
that she just needed to be loved, that was all. Her inner 
self  shone  through  her  eyes  and  the  Self  connected 
with  that  loving  essence.  In  that  second,  she  was 
healed by her own recognition of who she really was; 
what happened to her mind or body didn't matter to 
her any longer. 

This, in essence, occurred with countless patients. 
Some recovered in the eyes of the world and some did 
not, but whether a clinical recovery ensued didn't mat­
ter any  longer to  the  patients. Their inner agony  was 
over.As they felt  loved and at peace within, their pain 
stopped. This  phenomenon can only be explained  by 
saying that the Compassion of the Presence recontex­
tualized each patient's reality so that he or she experi­
enced  healing  on a  level  that  transcended  the  world 
and its appearances.The inner peace of the Self encom­
passed us beyond time and identity. 

It was clear that all pain and suffering arises solely 
from the ego and not from God.This truth was silently 
communicated to the minds of the  patients. This  was 

504 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

the mental block in another mute  catatonic who  had 
not spoken in many years.The Self said to him through 
mind, "You're blaming God for what your ego has done 
to you." He  jumped off the floor  and  began to speak, 
much  to  the  shock  of the  nurse  who  witnessed  the 
incident. 

The work became increasingly taxing and eventually 
overwhelming.  Patients  were  backed  up, waiting  for 
beds to open although the hospital had built an extra 
ward to house  them. There  was an  enormous frustra­
tion in that the human suffering could be countered in 
only one patient at  a  time. It was like  bailing  out the 
sea. It seemed  that  there  must be  some other way to 
address the causes of the common malaise, the endless 
stream of spiritual distress and human suffering. 

This led to the study of the physiological response 
(muscle testing) to various stimuli, which revealed an 
amazing discovery. It was the 'wormhole' between two 
universes-the  physical  world  and  the  world  of the 
mind and spirit-an interface between dimensions. In 
a world full of sleepers lost from their source, here was 
a  tool to  recover, and demonstrate  for  all  to  see, that 
lost connection with the higher reality. This led to the 
testing  of every SUbstance, thought, and concept that 
could be brought to mind. The endeavor was aided by 
my students and research assistants. Then a  major dis-. 
covery was made: whereas all subjects went weak from 
negative stunuli, such as fluorescent lights, pesticides, 
and  artificial  sweeteners,  students  of  spiritual  disci­
plines who had advanced their levels of awareness did 
not go weak as did ordinary people. Something impor­
tant and decisive had shifted in their consciousness. It 

A B OUT  THE  AUT H_O_R 

5_0_5 

apparently occurred as  they realized they were not at 
the  mercy  of the  world  but  rather  affected  only  by 
what their minds believed. Perhaps the very process of 
progress  toward  enlightenment  could  be  shown  to 
increase man's ability to resist the vicissitudes of exis­
tence, including illness. 

The Self had the  capacity to  change  things  in the 
world  by merely envisioning  them; Love  changed the 
world  each  time  it  replaced  non-love.  The  entire 
scheme of civilization could be profoundly altered by 
focusing  this  power of love  at  a  very  specific  point. 
Whenever  this  happened,  history  bifurcated  down 
new roads. 

It  now appeared  that  these  crucial  insights  could 
not  only be  communicated with  the  world but also 
visibly and irrefutably demonstrated. It seemed that the 
great  tragedy of human life  had always  been that  the 
psyche  is  so  easily  deceived;  discord  and  strife  have 
been the inevitable consequence of mankind's inability 
to distinguish the false from the true. But here was an 
answer to  this fundamental  dilemma, a  way to recon­
textualize the nature of consciousness itself and make 
explicable  that  which  otherwise  could  only  be 
inferred. 

It was time  to leave  life  in New York, with its City 
apartment  and  home  on  Long  Island,  for  something 
more important. It was necessary to perfect 'myself' as 
an instrument.This necessitated leaving that world and 
everything  in it,  replacing  it with  a  reclusive  life  in  a 
small town where the next seven years were spent in 
meditation and study. 

Overpowering  states  of bliss  returned  unsought, 

506 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY__~_ 

and eventually, there was the need to learn how to be 
in the Divine Presence and still function in the world. 
The mind had lost track of what was happening in the 
world  at  large. In order to do research  and writing, it 
was  necessary to stop  all  spiritual  practice and focus 
on  the  world  of form.  Reading  the  newspaper  and 
watching television helped to catch up on the story of 
who was who, the major events, and the nature of the 
current social dialogue. 

Exceptional subjective experiences of truth, which 
are the province of the mystic who affects all mankind 
by  sending  forth  spiritual  energy  into  the  collective 
consciousness, are not understandable by the majority 
of  mankind  and  are  therefore  of  limited  meaning 
except to other spiritual seekers.This led to an effort to 
be ordinary, because just being ordinary in itself is  an 
expression of Divinity; the truth of one's real  self can 
be discovered through the pathway of everyday life.To 
live with care and kindness is all  that is  necessary. The 
rest  reveals  itself in due  time. The  commonplace  and 
God are not distinct. 

And so, after  a  long  circular journey of the spirit, 
there was a return to the most important work, which 
was to try to bring the Presence at least a little  closer 
to the grasp of as many fellow beings as possible. 

The Presence is silent and conveys a state of peace 
that is the space in which and by which all is  and has 
its existence and experience. It is infmitely gentle and 
yet like a rock. With it, all  fear disappears. Spiritual joy 
occurs on a quiet level of inexplicable ecstasy. Because 
the experience of time  stops, there  are  no apprehen­

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

507 

sion or regret, no pain or anticipation; the source of joy 
is  unending  and  ever  present. With  no  beginning  or 
ending,  there  is  no  loss  or  grief  or  desire.  Nothing 
needs  to  be  done;  everything  is  already  perfect  and 
complete. 

When time stops, all  problems disappear; they are 
merely  artifacts  of  a  point  of  perception.  As  the 
Presence  prevails,  there  is  no  further  identification 
with  the  body or mind. When the mind grows silent, 
the thought "lAm" also disappears, and Pure Awareness 
shines forth to illuminate what one is, was, and always 
will  be,  beyond  all  worlds  and  all  universes,  beyond 
time, and therefore without beginning or end. 

People wonder, "How does one reach this  state  of 
awareness;' but few follow  the steps because they are 
so  simple.  First,  the  desire  to  reach  that  state  was 
intense.Then began the discipline to act with constant 
and  universal  forgiveness  and  gentleness,  without 
exception.  One  has  to. be  compassionate  towards 
everything,  including  one's  own  self  and  thoughts. 
Next came  a  willingness  to  hold  desires  in  abeyance 
and surrender personal will  at every moment. As  each 
thought,  feeling,  desire,  or  deed  was  surrendered  to 
God, the  mind  became  progressively  silent. At  first,  it 
released whole stories and paragraphs, then ideas and 
concepts. As  one  lets  go  of  wanting  to  own  these 
thoughts, they no  longer  reach  such  elaboration  and 
begin to fragment while only half formed. Finally, it was 
possible to turn over the energy behind thought itself 
before it even became thought. 

The task of constant and unrelenting ftxity of focus, 

allowing not even a moment of distraction from medi­

508 

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

tation,  continued  while  doing  ordinary  activities. At 
frrst, this seemed very difficult, but as  time went on, it 
became  habitual,  automatic,  requiring  less  and  less 
effort, and fmally, it was effortless. The process is like a 
rocket leaving the earth. At  frrst, it requires  enormous 
power, then less and less as it leaves the earth's gravita­
tional field, and finally, it moves through space under its 
own momentum. 

Suddenly,  without  warning,  a  shift  in  awareness 
occurred  and  the  Presence  was  there,  unmistakable 
and  all  encompassing. There  were  a  few  moments  of 
apprehension as  the  self died, and then  the  absolute­
ness of the Presence inspired a flash of awe.This break­
through  was  spectacular, more  intense  than  anything 
before. It has  no  counterpart in  ordinary experience. 
The profound shock was cushioned by the love that is 
with the Presence.Without the support and protection 
of that love, one would be annihilated. 

There followed a moment of terror as the ego clung 
to its existence, fearing  it would become nothingness. 
Instead,  as  it  died,  it  was  replaced  by  the  Self  as 
Everythingness, the All  in which everything is  known  . 
and  obvious  in  its  perfect  expression  of  its  own 
essence.With nonlocality came the awareness that one 
is all that ever was or can be. One is total and complete, 
beyond  all  identities, beyond all  gender, beyond  even 
humanness itself. One need never again fear suffering 
and death. 

What happens to the body from this point is imma­
terial. At  certain levels of spiritual awareness, ailments 
of the body heal or spontaneously disappear. But in the 
absolute  state, such  considerations  are  irrelevant. The 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR 

509 

body  will  run  its  predicted  course  and  then  return 
from whence it came. It is a  matter of no importance; 
one  is  unaffected. The  body  appears  as  an 'it'  rather 
than as  a 'me', as another object, like the furniture in a 
room. It may seem comical that people still address the 
body as though it were the individual 'you' ,but there is 
no  way  to  explain  this  state  of  awareness  to  the 
unaware. It is  best to  just go on about one's  business 
and allow Providence to handle the social adjustment. 
However, as one reaches bliss, it is very difficult to con­
ceal that state of intense ecstasy.The world may be daz­
zled, and people may come from far and wide to be in 
the accompanying aura. Spiritual seekers and the spiri­
tually curious may be attracted, as  may be the very ill 
who are seeking miracles. One may become a magnet 
and a source of joy to them. Commonly, there is a desire 
at this point to share this state with others and to use 
it for the benefit of all. 

The ecstasy that accompanies this condition is  not 
initially  absolutely  stable;  there  are  also  moments  of 
great  agony. The  most  intense  occur  when  the  state 
fluctuates and suddenly ceases for no apparent reason. 
These times bring on periods of intense despair and a 
fear that one has been forsaken by the Presence. These 
falls  make  the  path  arduous,  and  to  surmount  these 
reversals requires great will. It fmally becomes obvious 
that one must transcend this level or constantly suffer 
excruciating 'descents from grace' .The glory of ecstasy, 
then, has  to  be  relinquished  as  one  enters  upon  the 
arduous  task  of  transcending  duality  until  one  is 
beyond all oppositions and their conflicting pulls. But 
while it is one thing to happily give up the iron chains 

510 

"-~~~~-

HEALING  AND  RECOVERY 

-~~~-~~ 

of the  ego, it  is  quite  another to  abandon the golden 
chains of ecstatic joy. It feels as though one is giving up 
God, and a new level of fear arises, never before antici­
pated. This is the fmal terror of absolute aloneness. 

To  the  ego, the fear  of nonexistence was formida­
ble, and it drew back from it repeatedly as it seemed to 
approach. The  purpose  of  the  agonies  and  the  dark 
nights  of the soul then became apparent. They are so 
intolerable that their exquisite pain spurs one on to the 
extreme effort required to surmount them.When vacil­
lation between heaven and hell becomes unendurable, 
the  desire  for  existence  itself has  to  be  surrendered. 
Only once this  is  done may one fmally  move  beyond 
the duality ofAllness versus Nothingness, beyond exis­
tence  or nonexistence. This  culmination  of the  inner 
work  is  the  most  difficult  phase, the  ultimate  water­
shed, where  one  is  starkly  ~ware  that  the  illusion  of 
existence one here transcends  is  irrevocable. There is 
no  returning  from  this  step,  and  this  specter of irre­
versibility makes this last barrier appear to be the most 
formidable choice of all. 

But, in fact, in this final apocalypse of the self, the 

dissolution  of  the  sole  remaining  duality  of  exis­
tence  and  nonexistence-identity itself-dissolves  in 
Universal  Divinity, and  no  individual  consciousness  is 
left to choose. The last step, then, is  taken by God. 

-DaVid R. Hawkins 

For a list of available audio and video recordings
 
and other publications on consciousness
 
and spirituality by Dr. Hawkins,
 
please contact:
 

Veritas Publishing
 
P.  o. Box 3516
 
West Sedona,AZ  86340  U. S.A.
 

Phone: 928.282.8722  Fax: 928.282.4789
 

www.veritaspub.com
 

