ALSO	BY	DAVID	R.	HAWKINS,	M.D.,	PH.D.

Dissolving	the	Ego,	Realizing	the	Self

Along	the	Path	to	Enlightenment

Healing	and	Recovery

Reality,	Spirituality,	and	Modern	Man

Discovery	of	the	Presence	of	God:	Devotional	Nonduality

Transcending	the	Levels	of	Consciousness:	The	Stairway	to	Enlightenment

Truth	vs.	Falsehood:	How	to	Tell	the	Difference

I:	Reality	and	Subjectivity

The	Eye	of	the	I:	From	Which	Nothing	Is	Hidden

Power	vs.	Force:	The	Hidden	Determinants	of	Human	Behavior

Dialogues	on	Consciousness	and	Spirituality

Qualitative	and	Quantitative	Analysis	and	Calibration	of	the	Levels	of	Human	Consciousness

Orthomolecular	Psychiatry	(with	Linus	Pauling)

Please	visit:

Hay	House	USA:	www.hayhouse.com®
Hay	House	Australia:	www.hayhouse.com.au
Hay	House	UK:	www.hayhouse.co.uk
Hay	House	South	Africa:	www.hayhouse.co.za
Hay	House	India:	www.hayhouse.co.in

	
Copyright	©	2012	by	David	R.	Hawkins

Published	and	distributed	in	the	United	States	by:	Hay	House,	Inc.:	www.hayhouse.com®	•	Published
and	distributed	in	Australia	by:	Hay	House	Australia	Pty.	Ltd.:	www.hayhouse.com.au	•	Published	and
distributed	in	the	United	Kingdom	by:	Hay	House	UK,	Ltd.:	www.hayhouse.co.uk	•	Published	and
distributed	in	the	Republic	of	South	Africa	by:	Hay	House	SA	(Pty),	Ltd.:	www.hayhouse.co.za	•
Distributed	in	Canada	by:	Raincoast:	www.raincoast.com	•	Published	in	India	by:	Hay	House	Publishers
India:	www.hayhouse.co.in

All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	by	any	mechanical,	photographic,	or
electronic	process,	or	in	the	form	of	a	phonographic	recording;	nor	may	it	be	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,
transmitted,	or	otherwise	be	copied	for	public	or	private	use—other	than	for	“fair	use”	as	brief	quotations
embodied	in	articles	and	reviews—without	prior	written	permission	of	the	publisher.

The	author	of	this	book	does	not	dispense	medical	advice	or	prescribe	the	use	of	any	technique	as	a
form	of	treatment	for	physical,	emotional,	or	medical	problems	without	the	advice	of	a	physician,	either
directly	or	indirectly.	The	intent	of	the	author	is	only	to	offer	information	of	a	general	nature	to	help	you	in
your	quest	for	emotional	and	spiritual	well-being.	In	the	event	you	use	any	of	the	information	in	this	book
for	yourself,	which	is	your	constitutional	right,	the	author	and	the	publisher	assume	no	responsibility	for
your	actions.

Previously	published	by	Veritas	Publishing	(ISBN	978-1-933885-98-8)

Library	of	Congress	Control	Number	for	the	printed	edition:	2013947046

Tradepaper	ISBN:	978-1-4019-4501-5

16		15		14		13					4		3		2		1
1st	Hay	House	edition,	2013

Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America

	
Dedicated	to	removing	the	blocks	to	the	Higher	Self	on	the	path	to
Enlightenment

	
CONTENTS

Title	Page
Copyright	Page
Foreword
Preface

Chapter	1:			Introduction

Chapter	2:			The	Mechanism	of	Letting	Go

What	is	it?
Feelings	and	Mental	Mechanisms
Feelings	and	Stress
Life	Events	and	Emotions
Mechanism	of	Letting	Go
Resistance	to	Letting	Go

Chapter	3:			The	Anatomy	of	Emotions

Goal	of	Survival
Scale	of	Emotions
Understanding	Emotions
Handling	Emotional	Crises
Healing	the	Past
Enhancing	Positive	Emotions

Chapter	4:			Apathy	and	Depression

“I	Can’t”	vs.	“I	Won’t”
Blame
Choosing	the	Positive
The	Company	We	Keep

Chapter	5:			Grief

Allowing	the	Grief
Handling	Loss
Preventing	Grief

	
Chapter	6:			Fear

Fear	of	Public	Speaking
Healing	Effect	of	Love
Owning	the	“Shadow”
Guilt

Chapter	7:			Desire

Desire	as	an	Obstacle
Having—Doing—Being
Glamour
Power	of	Inner	Decision

Chapter	8:			Anger

Using	Anger	Positively
Self-Sacrifice
Acknowledgment
Expectations
Chronic	Resentment

Chapter	9:			Pride

Vulnerability	of	Pride
Humility
Joy	and	Gratitude
Opinions

Chapter	10:	Courage

Courage	to	Let	Go
Self-Empowerment
Awareness	of	Others

Chapter	11:	Acceptance

Everything	Is	Perfect	As	It	Is
Acceptance	of	Self	and	Others
Personal	Responsibility

Chapter	12:	Love

Love	in	Everyday	Life
Love	Heals

Unconditional	Love
Oneness

Chapter	13:	Peace

Profound	Impact	of	Peace
Silent	Transmission
Surrender	to	Ultimate	Reality

Chapter	14:	Reducing	Stress	and	Physical	Illness

Psychological	Aspects	and	Stress	Proneness
Medical	Aspects	of	Stress
Energy	System	Response	to	Stress	and	the	Acupuncture	System
Interventions	to	Alleviate	Stress
Kinesiologic	Testing
Kinesiologic	Testing	Technique
The	Relationship	of	Consciousness	to	Stress	and	Disease

Chapter	15:	The	Relationship	between	Mind	and	Body

Influence	of	Mind
Disease-Prone	Beliefs
Comparison	with	Other	Techniques

Chapter	16:	The	Benefits	of	Letting	Go

Emotional	Growth
Problem	Solving
Lifestyle
Resolution	of	Psychological	Problems:	Comparison	with

Psychotherapy

Chapter	17:	Transformation

Health
Wealth
Happiness
State	of	Inner	Freedom

Chapter	18:	Relationships

Negative	Feelings
The	Human	Condition

Positive	Feelings
Sexual	Relations

Chapter	19:	Achievement	of	Vocational	Goals

Feelings	and	Abilities
Negative	Feelings	Related	to	Work
Positive	Feelings	Related	to	Work
Feelings	and	the	Decision-Making	Process
Feelings	and	Sales	Ability

Chapter	20:	Physician,	Heal	Thyself

Basic	Principles
Healing	of	Multiple	Diseases
Healing	of	Vision

Chapter	21:	Questions	and	Answers

Religious	and	Spiritual	Goals
Meditation	and	Inner	Techniques
Psychotherapy
Alcoholism	and	Drug	Addiction
Relationships
The	Mechanism
Surrender	to	the	Ultimate

Appendix	A:	Map	of	Consciousness
Appendix	B:	Muscle	Testing	Procedure

References
About	the	Author

FOREWORD

This	book	provides	a	mechanism	by	which	to	unlock	our	innate	capacities	for
happiness,	success,	health,	well-being,	intuition,	unconditional	love,	beauty,
inner	peace,	and	creativity.	These	states	and	capacities	are	within	all	of	us.	They
do	not	depend	on	any	outer	circumstance	or	personal	characteristic;	they	do	not
require	belief	in	any	religious	system.	No	single	group	or	system	owns	inner
peace,	as	it	belongs	to	the	human	spirit	by	virtue	of	our	origin.	This	is	the
universal	message	of	every	great	teacher,	sage,	and	saint:	“The	kingdom	of
heaven	is	within	you.”	Dr.	Hawkins	says	frequently,	“What	you	are	seeking	is
not	different	from	your	very	own	Self.”

How	can	something	innate	to	us—part	and	parcel	of	our	true	being—be	so

difficult	to	attain?	Why	all	the	unhappiness	if	we	were	endowed	with	happiness?
If	the	“kingdom	of	heaven”	is	within	us,	why	do	we	often	“feel	like	hell”?	How
can	we	get	free	of	the	sludge	of	non-peace	that	makes	our	journey	to	inner	peace
seem	so	arduous,	like	molasses	running	uphill	on	a	freezing	cold	day?	It’s	nice
to	hear	that	peace,	happiness,	joy,	love,	and	success	are	intrinsic	to	our	human
spirit.	But	what	about	all	of	the	anger,	sadness,	despair,	vanity,	jealousy,
anxieties,	and	daily	little	judgments	that	muffle	the	pristine	sound	of	silence
within	us?	Is	there	really	a	way	to	shake	off	the	sludge	and	be	free?	Dance	with
unimpeded	joy?	Love	all	living	things?	Live	in	our	greatness	and	fulfill	our
highest	potential?	Become	a	channel	of	grace	and	beauty	in	the	world?

In	this	book,	Dr.	Hawkins	offers	a	pathway	to	the	freedom	that	we	long	for
but	find	difficult	to	attain.	It	may	sound	counter-intuitive	to	get	somewhere	by
“letting	go”;	however,	he	certifies	from	clinical	and	personal	experience	that
surrender	is	the	surest	route	to	total	fulfillment.

Many	of	us	have	been	raised	to	correlate	worldly	and	even	spiritual

accomplishment	with	“hard	work,”	“keeping	our	nose	to	the	grindstone,”	“living
by	the	sweat	of	our	brow,”	and	other	self-stringent	axioms	inherited	from	a
culture	steeped	in	the	Protestant	ethic.	According	to	this	view,	success	requires
suffering,	toil,	and	effort:	“no	pain,	no	gain.”	But	where	has	all	the	effort	and
pain	gotten	us?	Are	we	truly,	deeply	at	peace?	No.	There	is	still	the	inner	guilt,
the	vulnerability	to	someone’s	criticism,	the	wanting	to	be	assured,	and	the
resentments	that	fester.

If	you’re	reading	this	book,	you’ve	probably	already	reached	the	end	of	your

	
rope	with	the	mechanism	of	effort.	Perhaps	you’ve	seen	that	the	more	you	pull
on	the	rope	to	hitch	yourself	up	to	where	you	want	to	be,	the	more	frazzled	and
frayed	it	becomes.	Possibly,	you	might	be	wondering,	“Isn’t	there	an	easier,
better	way?”	Are	you	willing	to	let	go	of	the	rope?	What	would	it	be	like	to
utilize	the	mechanism	of	surrender	instead	of	the	mechanism	of	effort?

I	can	share	what	it	was	like	for	a	highly	educated	person	who	had	already
tried	many	different	methods	of	self-improvement.	Despite	professional	success,
there	were	physical	and	emotional	problems	that	never	seemed	to	improve	and,
eventually,	reached	a	breaking	point.	The	encounter	with	Dr.	David	R.	Hawkins
and	his	writings	catalyzed	a	healing	effect	that	was	unexpected	and	dramatic.

At	first,	there	was	skepticism.	Having	explored	various	spiritual,

philosophical,	and	religious	avenues	with	unfulfilling	or	only	temporary	results,
I	approached	my	study	of	Hawkins	with	the	thought,	“It	will	probably	turn	out
like	the	rest.”	However,	the	conscientious	seeker	in	me	said,	“I’ll	check	it	out.
What	have	I	got	to	lose?”	So,	I	read	Power	vs.	Force:	The	Hidden
Determinants	of	Human	Behavior.	When	the	book	was	finished,	there	was	the
inner	realization,	“I’m	a	changed	person	from	the	one	who	picked	up	this	book.”
That	was	in	2003.	Now,	many	years	later,	the	catalytic	effect	is	still	operating	in
all	areas	of	life.

What	convinced	me	of	the	truth	of	his	work,	ultimately,	were	the

transformations	in	my	own	physical	and	nonphysical	consciousness.	There	were
empirical	facts	that	I	could	not	deny:	the	healing	of	an	addiction	that	had	been
previously	impossible	to	overcome,	despite	many	sincere	attempts;	freedom
from	several	allergies	(pet	dander,	poison	ivy,	mold,	hay	fever);	letting	go	of
long-standing	resentments,	with	a	capacity	to	see	the	hidden	gifts	within	the
various	life	traumas	I	had	been	through;	alleviation	of	several	life-long	fears	and
an	anxiety	disorder	that	had	severely	limited	my	career	and	personal	life;
resolution	of	several	inner	conflicts	related	to	self-acceptance	and	life	purpose.
These	major	breakthroughs	at	the	physical	and	nonphysical	levels	were
concretely	observable	not	only	by	myself	but	by	those	around	me.	They	would
ask,	“How	do	you	explain	the	transformation?”	Now,	if	faced	with	that	question,
I	will	suggest	that	they	read	this	new	book,	Letting	Go:	The	Pathway	of
Surrender.	It	lays	out	the	pragmatics	of	the	inner	process	of	transformation	that
was	experienced	upon	reading	his	earlier	books.

Letting	Go:	The	Pathway	of	Surrender	provides	the	roadmap	to	a	freer	life

for	anyone	who	is	willing	to	make	the	trip.	Your	life	will	be	changed	for	the
better	if	you	apply	the	principles	described	in	this	book.	They	are	not	difficult	to
understand	or	to	implement.	They	do	not	cost	anything.	They	do	not	require
special	attire	or	travel	to	an	exotic	country.	The	major	requirement	for	the

journey	is	a	willingness	to	let	go	of	the	attachment	to	your	current	experience	of
life.

As	Dr.	Hawkins	explains,	the	“small”	part	of	ourselves	is	attached	to	the

familiar,	no	matter	how	painful	or	inefficient	it	is.	It	may	seem	bizarre,	but	our
self	with	a	small	“s”	actually	enjoys	an	impoverished	life	and	all	the	negativity
that	goes	with	it:	feeling	unworthy,	being	invalidated,	judging	others	and
ourselves,	being	inflated,	always	“winning”	and	being	“right,”	grieving	the	past,
fearing	the	future,	nursing	our	wounds,	craving	assurance,	and	seeking	love
instead	of	giving	it.

Are	we	willing	to	imagine	a	new	life	for	ourselves,	characterized	by

effortless	success,	freedom	from	resentment,	gratitude	for	all	that’s	happened	to
us,	inspiration,	love,	joy,	win-win	resolutions,	happiness,	and	creative
expression?	One	of	the	biggest	hurdles	to	happiness,	he	tells	us,	is	the	belief	that
it	isn’t	possible:	“There’s	got	to	be	a	catch”;	“It’s	too	good	to	be	true”;	“It	can
happen	for	others	but	not	for	me.”

The	gift	of	a	person	and	teacher	like	Dr.	Hawkins	is	that	we	see	and
experience	a	being	who	IS	that	happiness;	who	IS	that	boundless	joy;	who	IS
that	unassailable	peace.	The	book	was	written	because	he	himself	experienced
the	power	of	the	mechanism	it	describes.	To	read	about	and	be	in	the	presence	of
such	a	liberated	being	gives	us	the	catalyst,	the	hope,	and	the	launch	for	our	own
inward	trek.	And	so,	despite	the	cynicism	of	the	small	self,	there	is	the	Self	that
beckons	us	on.	We	may	first	hear	its	call	as	coming	from	an	advanced
consciousness	such	as	Dr.	Hawkins,	a	teacher,	a	guide,	or	a	sage	who	has
realized	the	Self.	Then,	as	we	have	our	own	experiences	of	truth,	healing,	and
expansion,	we	hear	the	call	as	coming	from	an	inner	place.	“The	Self	of	the
teacher	and	that	of	the	student	are	one	and	the	same,”	says	Dr.	Hawkins.

He	radiates	the	truths	of	this	book.	As	a	serious	seeker	who	saw	much	of
contemporary	spiritual	writing	as	shallow,	I	wanted	to	verify	the	authenticity	of
this	work.	It	was	all-important	to	know:	does	this	author	speak	from	a	true	inner
Realization?	The	answer	is	“Yes!”	Close	observations	made	during	several	years
of	interviews	and	visits	confirmed	the	advanced	state.	In	this	book,	he	reminds
us	of	the	law	of	consciousness	that	says:	We	are	all	connected	at	the	energetic
level,	and	a	higher	vibration	(such	as	love)	has	a	powerful	effect	on	a	lower
vibration	(such	as	fear).	I	feel	the	truth	of	this	law	whenever	I	am	with	him;	his
energy	field	transmits	healing	love	and	profound	peace.	As	he	explains	in	this
book,	these	higher	states	are	available	to	all	of	us	at	any	time.

No	matter	where	we	are	in	life,	this	book	will	illumine	a	“next	step.”	The
mechanism	of	surrender	that	Dr.	Hawkins	describes	is	applicable	to	the	entire
inner	journey:	from	the	letting	go	of	childhood	resentments	to	the	final	surrender

of	the	ego	itself.	Thus,	the	book	is	equally	useful	for	the	professional	interested
in	worldly	success,	the	client	in	therapy	seeking	to	heal	emotional	issues,	the
patient	diagnosed	with	an	illness,	and	the	spiritual	seeker	devoted	to
Enlightenment.	The	important	step	for	all	of	us,	he	advises,	is	to	acknowledge
that	we	have	negative	feelings	as	a	consequence	of	our	human	condition,	and	to
be	willing	to	look	at	them	without	judgment.	The	high	state	of	non-dual
awareness	may	be	our	goal.	But	how	do	we	handle	the	persistently	dualistic
“small	self”	that	wants	us	to	see	ourselves	as	“better	than”	or	“worse	than”
another?

In	his	previous	ten	books,	Dr.	Hawkins	has	described	the	non-dual	state	of
Enlightenment	with	rare	pristine	awareness.	As	he	says	humorously	at	the	start
of	many	lectures,	“We	begin	with	the	end.”	Indeed,	in	his	lectures	and	books,	he
has	thoroughly	illuminated	the	highest	states	of	consciousness	that	are	the
culmination	of	human	inner	evolution.

Now,	in	this	book	published	in	the	latter	part	of	his	life,	he	is	taking	us	back
to	our	common	starting	point:	acknowledging	the	existence	of	the	small	self.	We
must	start	where	we	are	to	get	to	where	we	want	to	go!	If	we	want	to	go	from
here	to	there,	we	don’t	get	there	faster	if	we	fool	ourselves	and	say	we	are
starting	from	nearby.	By	thinking	we’re	closer	than	we	are	to	the	goal,	we
actually	make	the	trip	longer.	As	he	explains	in	the	book,	it	takes	courage	and
self-honesty	to	see	negativity	and	smallness	in	ourselves.	Only	when	we	can
acknowledge	the	negativity	that	we’ve	inherited	from	the	human	condition	will
we	have	the	possibility	to	surrender	and	be	free	of	it.	We	simply	need	to	be
willing	to	acknowledge	and	accept	that	part	of	our	human	experience.	By
accepting	it,	we	can	transcend	it—and	Dr.	Hawkins	shows	us	the	way.

In	this	highly	pragmatic	book,	he	illumines	a	technique	by	which	we	can
transcend	the	small	self	and	break	through	to	the	freedom	for	which	we	long.
This	state	of	inner	freedom	and	unalloyed	happiness	is	our	“birthright,”	he	says.
As	we	read,	we	draw	encouragement	and	inspiration	from	the	real-life	clinical
examples	that	he	shares	from	his	decades	of	psychiatric	practice.	In	case	after
case,	we	see	the	power	of	surrender	applied	to	nearly	every	area	of	life:
relationships,	physical	health,	work	environments,	recreational	activities,
spiritual	process,	family	life,	sexuality,	emotional	healing,	and	addiction
recovery.

We	learn	that	the	answer	to	the	problems	we	face	is	within	us.	By	letting	go

of	the	inner	blocks	to	it,	the	truth	of	our	inner	Self	shines	forth	and	the	path	to
peace	is	revealed.	Other	spiritual	teachers	have	emphasized	the	cultivation	of
inner	peace	as	the	only	real	solution	to	personal	difficulties,	as	well	as	collective
conflicts:	“Inner	disarmament	first,	then	outer	disarmament”	(The	Dalai	Lama);

“Be	the	change	you	want	to	see	in	the	world”	(Gandhi).	The	implication	is	clear.
Because	we	are	all	part	of	the	whole,	when	we	heal	something	in	ourselves,	we
heal	it	for	the	world.	Each	individual	consciousness	is	connected	to	the
collective	consciousness	at	the	energetic	level;	therefore,	personal	healing
emerges	collective	healing.	Dr.	Hawkins	may	be	the	first	to	attempt	to
understand	this	principle	in	light	of	scientific	and	clinical	applications.	The
crucial	point	is:	by	changing	ourselves,	we	change	the	world.	As	we	become
more	loving	on	the	inside,	healing	occurs	on	the	outside.	Much	like	the	rising	of
the	sea	level	lifts	all	ships,	so	the	radiance	of	unconditional	love	within	a	human
heart	lifts	all	of	life.

Dr.	David	R.	Hawkins	is	a	world-renowned	author,	psychiatrist,	clinician,
spiritual	teacher,	and	researcher	of	consciousness.	Details	of	his	extraordinary
life	are	given	in	the	“About	the	Author”	section	at	the	back	of	the	book.	His
unique	work	effulges	from	a	wellspring	of	universal	compassion	and	is
dedicated	to	the	alleviation	of	suffering	in	all	dimensions	of	life.	The	gift	of	Dr.
Hawkins’	work	to	human	evolvement	is	beyond	what	can	be	said	about	it.

The	state	of	Enlightenment	is	totally	complete	in	its	bliss,	such	that	one
would	never	leave	it	except	out	of	a	total	surrender	of	love	to	God	and	to	one’s
fellow	human	beings,	to	share	the	gift	that	was	given.	This	book	on	letting	go,
and	all	of	his	work	in	the	world,	is	the	result	of	that	surrender.	As	you	will	read
in	one	of	the	chapters,	there	was	a	very	deep	surrender	that	allowed	the
resumption	of	his	personal	consciousness	in	order	to	fulfill	certain	commitments
in	the	world.	The	state	of	oneness	was	not	lost	or	left,	but	extraordinary	love	had
to	be	directed	toward	the	challenge	of	verbalizing	the	ineffable.	You	will	notice
that	some	of	his	pronouns	do	not	fit	grammatical	convention—for	example,	“our
life”—yet	they	are	true	to	the	experience	of	a	spiritual	state	that	knows	the
impersonal	oneness	of	all	life.	That	Dr.	Hawkins	would	re-enter	the	world	of
logic	and	language	in	order	to	share	a	“Map	of	Consciousness”	with	us—so	that
we	might	also	complete	our	destiny—speaks	volumes	of	his	selfless	love	for
humanity.	By	showing	us	the	way	to	liberation,	Dr.	Hawkins	gives	us	the	chance
of	reaching	it.

Thank	you,	Dr.	Hawkins,	for	the	gift	of	total	surrender.

Fran	Grace,	Ph.D.,	editor.
Professor	of	Religious	Studies	and
Steward	of	the	Meditation	Room
University	of	Redlands,	California
Founding	Director,	Institute	for

Contemplative	Life
Sedona,	Arizona
June	2012

PREFACE

During	many	years	of	clinical	psychiatric	practice,	the	primary	aim	was	to	seek
the	most	effective	ways	to	relieve	human	suffering	in	all	of	its	many	forms.	To
this	end,	numerous	disciplines	of	medicine,	psychology,	psychiatry,
psychoanalysis,	behavioral	techniques,	bio-feedback,	acupuncture,	nutrition,	and
brain	chemistry	were	explored.	Beyond	these	clinical	modalities	were
philosophical	systems,	metaphysics,	a	multitude	of	holistic	health	techniques,
self-improvement	courses,	spiritual	pathways,	meditative	techniques,	and	other
ways	to	expand	one’s	awareness.

In	all	of	these	explorations,	the	mechanism	of	surrender	was	found	to	be	of

great	practical	benefit.	Its	importance	necessitated	the	writing	of	this	book	to
share	with	others	what	was	clinically	observed	and	personally	experienced.

The	previous	ten	books	focused	on	advanced	states	of	awareness	and
Enlightenment.	Over	the	years,	thousands	of	students	at	our	lectures	and
Satsangs	have	asked	questions	that	reveal	the	everyday	obstacles	to
Enlightenment.	It	is	pragmatic	and	helpful	to	share	a	technique	that	will	facilitate
their	success	in	overcoming	such	obstacles:	How	to	handle	the	vicissitudes	of
ordinary	life,	with	its	losses,	disappointments,	stresses,	and	crises?	How	to	be
free	of	negative	emotions	and	their	impact	on	health,	relationships,	and	work?
How	to	handle	all	of	the	unwanted	feelings?	The	present	work	describes	a
simple	and	effective	means	by	which	to	let	go	of	negative	feelings	and	become
free.

The	letting	go	technique	is	a	pragmatic	system	of	eliminating	obstacles	and
attachments.	It	can	also	be	called	a	mechanism	of	surrender.	There	is	scientific
proof	of	its	efficacy,	an	explanation	of	which	is	included	in	one	of	the	chapters.
Research	has	shown	the	technique	to	be	more	effective	than	many	other
approaches	currently	available	in	relieving	the	physiologic	responses	to	stress.
After	researching	most	of	the	various	stress-reduction	and	consciousness
methods,	this	approach	stands	out	for	its	sheer	simplicity,	efficiency,	clinical
efficacy,	absence	of	questionable	concepts,	and	rapidity	of	observable	results.	Its
simplicity	is	deceptive	and	almost	disguises	the	real	benefit	of	the	technique.
Simply	stated,	it	sets	us	free	from	emotional	attachments.	It	verifies	the
observation	made	by	every	sage,	that	attachments	are	the	primary	cause	of
suffering.

	
The	mind,	with	its	thoughts,	is	driven	by	feelings.	Each	feeling	is	the
cumulative	derivative	of	many	thousands	of	thoughts.	Because	most	people
throughout	their	lives	repress,	suppress,	and	try	to	escape	from	their	feelings,	the
suppressed	energy	accumulates	and	seeks	expression	through	psychosomatic
distress,	bodily	disorders,	emotional	illnesses,	and	disordered	behavior	in
interpersonal	relationships.	The	accumulated	feelings	block	spiritual	growth	and
awareness,	as	well	as	success	in	many	areas	of	life.

The	benefits	of	this	technique	can,	therefore,	be	described	on	various	levels:

Physical:
The	elimination	of	suppressed	emotions	has	a	positive	health	benefit.	It
decreases	the	overflow	of	energy	into	the	body’s	autonomic	nervous	system,	and
it	unblocks	the	acupuncture	energy	system	(demonstrable	by	a	simple	muscle
test).	Therefore,	as	a	person	constantly	surrenders,	physical	and	psychosomatic
disorders	improve	and	frequently	disappear	altogether.	There	is	a	general
reversal	of	pathologic	processes	in	the	body	and	a	return	to	optimal	functioning.

Behavioral:
Because	there	is	a	progressive	decrease	of	anxiety	and	negative	emotions,	there
is	less	and	less	need	for	escapism	via	drugs,	alcohol,	entertainment,	and
excessive	sleep.	Consequently,	there	is	an	increase	in	vitality,	energy,	presence,
and	well-being,	with	more	efficient	and	effortless	functioning	in	all	areas.

Interpersonal	Relationships:
As	negative	feelings	are	surrendered,	there	is	a	progressive	increase	of	positive
feelings	that	results	in	quickly	observable	improvement	in	all	relationships.
There	is	an	increase	in	the	capacity	to	love.	Conflicts	with	others	decrease
progressively,	so	that	job	performance	improves.	The	elimination	of	negative
blocks	allows	vocational	goals	to	be	more	easily	accomplished,	and	self-
sabotaging	behavior	based	on	guilt	progressively	diminishes.	There	is	less	and
less	dependence	on	intellectualism	and	a	greater	use	of	intuitive	knowingness.
With	the	resumption	of	personality	growth	and	development,	there	is	often	the
uncovering	of	previously	unsuspected	creative	and	psychic	abilities,	which	are
thwarted	in	all	people	by	suppressed	negative	emotions.	Of	great	importance	is
the	progressive	diminution	of	dependency,	the	bane	of	all	human	relationships.
Dependency	underlies	so	much	pain	and	suffering;	it	includes	even	violence	and
suicide	as	its	ultimate	expression.	As	dependency	diminishes,	there	is	also	a
diminution	of	aggressiveness	and	hostile	behavior.	These	negative	feelings	are

replaced	by	feelings	of	acceptance	and	lovingness	toward	others.

Consciousness/	Awareness/	Spirituality:
This	is	an	area	that	opens	up	by	continuous	use	of	the	mechanism	of	surrender.
The	letting	go	of	negative	emotions	means	that	the	person	experiences	ever-
increasing	happiness,	contentment,	peace,	and	joy.	There	is	an	expansion	of
awareness,	progressive	realization,	and	experiencing	of	the	real	inner	Self.	The
teachings	of	the	Great	Masters	unfold	from	within	as	one’s	own	personal
experience.	The	progressive	letting	go	of	limitations	allows	the	realization	at	last
of	one’s	true	identity.	Letting	go	is	one	of	the	most	efficacious	tools	by	which	to
reach	spiritual	goals.

Anyone	can	accomplish	all	of	these	ends,	with	gentleness	and	subtlety,	as
one	silently	surrenders	throughout	daily	life.	The	progressive	disappearance	of
negativity	and	its	replacement	by	positive	feelings	and	experiences	is	pleasurable
both	to	watch	and	to	experience.	It	is	the	purpose	of	this	information	to	assist	the
reader	in	having	those	rewarding	experiences.

David	R.	Hawkins,	M.D.,	Ph.D.
Founding	President,
Institute	for	Spiritual	Research
Sedona,	Arizona
June	2012

CHAPTER

1

INTRODUCTION

While	in	contemplation	one	day,	the	mind	said:

“What	in	the	world	is	wrong	with	us?”
“Why	doesn’t	happiness	stay	put?”
“Where	are	the	answers?”
“How	do	we	address	the	human	dilemma?”
“Have	I	gone	nuts	or	has	the	world	gone	crazy?”

The	solution	to	any	problem	seems	to	bring	only	brief	relief,	for	it	is	the

very	basis	of	the	next	problem.

“Is	the	human	mind	a	hopeless	squirrel	cage?”
“Is	everybody	confused?”
“Does	God	know	what	He’s	doing?”
“Is	God	dead?”

The	mind	just	kept	chattering	along:

“Does	anybody	have	the	secret?”

Don’t	worry—everybody’s	desperate.	Some	seem	cool	about	it.	“I	can’t	see

what	all	the	fuss	is	about,”	they	say.	“Life	seems	simple	to	me.”	They	are	so
scared	they	can’t	even	look	at	it!

How	about	the	experts?	Their	confusion	is	more	sophisticated,	wrapped	in

	
impressive	jargon	and	elaborate	mental	construction.	They	have	predetermined
belief	systems	into	which	they	try	to	squeeze	you.	It	seems	to	work	for	a	while
and,	then,	it	is	just	back	to	one’s	original	state	again.

It	used	to	be	that	we	could	count	on	social	institutions,	but	they	have	had
their	day;	nobody	trusts	them	any	more.	We	now	have	more	watchdogs	than
institutions.	The	hospitals	are	monitored	by	multiple	agencies.	Nobody	has	time
for	the	patients,	who	get	lost	in	the	shuffle.	Look	down	the	corridors.	There	are
no	doctors	or	nurses.	They	are	in	the	offices	doing	paperwork.	The	whole	scene
is	dehumanized.

“Well,”	you	say,	“there	have	to	be	some	experts	who	have	the	answers.”
When	upset,	you	go	to	a	doctor	or	psychiatrist,	an	analyst,	a	social	worker,	or	an
astrologer.	You	take	up	religion,	get	philosophy,	take	the	Erhard	Seminars
Training	(est),	tap	yourself	with	EFT.	You	get	your	chakras	balanced,	try	some
reflexology,	go	for	ear	acupuncture,	do	iridology,	get	healed	with	lights	and
crystals.

You	meditate,	chant	a	mantra,	drink	green	tea,	try	the	Pentecostals,	breathe

in	fire,	and	speak	in	tongues.	You	get	centered,	learn	NLP,	try	actualizations,
work	on	visualizations,	study	psychology,	join	a	Jungian	group.	You	get	Rolfed,
try	psychedelics,	get	a	psychic	reading,	jog,	jazzercise,	have	colonics,	get	into
nutrition	and	aerobics,	hang	upside	down,	wear	psychic	jewelry.	Get	more
insight,	bio-feedback,	Gestalt	therapy.

You	see	your	homeopath,	chiropractor,	naturopath.	You	try	kinesiology,

discover	your	Enneagram	type,	get	your	meridians	balanced,	join	a
consciousness-raising	group,	take	tranquilizers.	You	get	some	hormone	shots,	try
cell	salts,	have	your	minerals	balanced,	pray,	implore,	and	beseech.	You	learn
astral	projection.	Become	a	vegetarian.	Eat	only	cabbage.	Try	macrobiotics,	go
organic,	eat	no	GMO.	Meet	up	with	Native	American	medicine	men,	do	a	sweat
lodge.	Try	Chinese	herbs,	moxicombustion,	shiatsu,	acupressure,	feng	shui.	You
go	to	India.	Find	a	new	guru.	Take	off	your	clothes.	Swim	in	the	Ganges.	Stare
at	the	sun.	Shave	your	head.	Eat	with	your	fingers,	get	really	messy,	shower	in
cold	water.

Sing	tribal	chants.	Relive	past	lives.	Try	hypnotic	regression.	Scream	a
primal	scream.	Punch	pillows.	Get	Feldenkraised.	Join	a	marriage	encounter
group.	Go	to	Unity.	Write	affirmations.	Make	a	vision	board.	Get	re-birthed.
Cast	the	I	Ching.	Do	the	Tarot	cards.	Study	Zen.	Take	more	courses	and
workshops.	Read	lots	of	books.	Do	transactional	analysis.	Get	yoga	lessons.	Get
into	the	occult.	Study	magic.	Work	with	a	kahuna.	Take	a	shamanic	journey.	Sit
under	a	pyramid.	Read	Nostradamus.	Prepare	for	the	worst.

Go	on	a	retreat.	Try	fasting.	Take	amino	acids.	Get	a	negative	ion	generator.

Join	a	mystery	school.	Learn	a	secret	handshake.	Try	toning.	Try	color	therapy.
Try	subliminal	tapes.	Take	brain	enzymes,	antidepressants,	flower	remedies.	Go
to	health	spas.	Cook	with	exotic	ingredients.	Look	into	strange	fermented
oddities	from	faraway	places.	Go	to	Tibet.	Hunt	up	holy	men.	Hold	hands	in	a
circle	and	get	high.	Renounce	sex	and	going	to	the	movies.	Wear	some	yellow
robes.	Join	a	cult.

Try	the	endless	varieties	of	psychotherapy.	Take	wonder	drugs.	Subscribe	to

lots	of	journals.	Try	the	Pritikin	diet.	Eat	just	grapefruit.	Get	your	palm	read.
Think	New	Age	thought.	Improve	the	ecology.	Save	the	planet.	Get	an	aura
reading.	Carry	a	crystal.	Get	a	Hindu	sidereal	astrological	interpretation.	Visit	a
transmedium.	Go	for	sex	therapy.	Try	Tantric	sex.	Get	blessed	by	Baba
Somebody.	Join	an	anonymous	group.	Travel	to	Lourdes.	Soak	in	the	hot
springs.	Join	Arica.	Wear	therapeutic	sandals.	Get	grounded.	Get	more	prana	and
breathe	out	that	stale	black	negativity.	Try	golden	needle	acupuncture.	Check	out
snake	gallbladders.	Try	chakra	breathing.	Get	your	aura	cleaned.	Meditate	in
Cheops,	the	great	pyramid	in	Egypt.

You	and	your	friends	have	tried	all	of	the	above,	you	say?	Oh,	the	human!
You	wonderful	creature!	Tragic,	comic	and	yet	so	noble!	Such	courage	to	keep
on	searching!	What	drives	us	to	keep	looking	for	an	answer?	Suffering?	Oh,	yes.
Hope?	Certainly.	But	there	is	something	more	than	that.

Intuitively,	we	know	that	somewhere	there	is	an	ultimate	answer.	We
stumble	down	dark	byways	into	cul-de-sacs	and	blind	alleys;	we	get	exploited
and	taken,	disillusioned,	fed	up,	and	we	keep	on	trying.

Where	is	our	blind	spot?	Why	can’t	we	find	the	answer?

We	don’t	understand	the	problem;	that’s	why	we	can’t	find	the	answer.
Maybe	it’s	ultra	simple,	and	that’s	why	we	can’t	see	it.
Maybe	the	solution	is	not	“out	there,”	and	that’s	why	we	can’t	find	it.

Maybe	we	have	so	many	belief	systems	that	we	are	blinded	to	the
obvious.

Throughout	history,	a	few	individuals	have	reached	great	clarity	and	have
experienced	the	ultimate	solution	to	our	human	woes.	How	did	they	get	there?
What	was	their	secret?	Why	can’t	we	understand	what	they	had	to	teach?	Is	it
really	next	to	impossible	or	nearly	hopeless?	What	about	the	average	person	who
is	not	a	spiritual	genius?

Multitudes	follow	spiritual	pathways,	but	scarce	are	the	ones	who	finally
succeed	and	realize	the	ultimate	truth.	Why	is	that?	We	follow	ritual	and	dogma

and	zealously	practice	spiritual	discipline—and	we	crash	once	again!	Even	when
it	works,	the	ego	quickly	comes	in	and	we	are	caught	in	pride	and	smugness,
thinking	we	have	the	answers.	Oh,	Lord,	save	us	from	the	ones	who	have	the
answers!	Save	us	from	the	righteous!	Save	us	from	the	do-gooders!

Confusion	is	our	salvation.	For	the	confused,	there	is	still	hope.	Hang	on	to

your	confusion.	In	the	end	it	is	your	best	friend,	your	best	defense	against	the
deathliness	of	others’	answers,	against	being	raped	by	their	ideas.	If	you	are
confused,	you	are	still	free.	If	you	are	confused,	this	book	is	for	you.

What’s	in	the	book?	It	tells	of	a	simple	method	to	reach	great	clarity	and

transcend	your	problems	along	the	way.	It’s	not	by	finding	the	answers,	but	by
undoing	the	basis	of	the	problem.	The	state	reached	by	the	great	sages	of	history
is	available;	the	solutions	are	within	us	and	easy	to	find.	The	mechanism	of
surrender	is	simple	and	the	truth	is	self-evident.	It	works	during	daily	life.	There
is	no	dogma	or	belief	system.	You	verify	everything	for	yourself,	so	you	cannot
be	misled.	There	is	no	dependence	on	any	teachings.	It	follows	the	dicta	of
“Know	thyself”;	“The	truth	shall	set	you	free”;	and	“The	kingdom	of	God	is
within	you.”	It	works	for	the	cynic,	the	pragmatist,	the	religionist,	and	the
atheist.	It	works	for	any	age	or	cultural	background.	It	works	for	the	spiritual
person	and	the	non-spiritual	person	alike.

Because	the	mechanism	is	your	own,	nobody	can	take	it	away	from	you.
You	are	safe	from	disillusionment.	You	will	find	out	for	yourself	what	is	real
and	what	are	just	the	mind’s	programs	and	belief	systems.	While	all	of	this	is
going	on,	you	will	become	healthier,	more	successful	with	less	effort,	happier,
and	more	capable	of	real	love.	Your	friends	will	notice	a	difference;	the	changes
are	permanent.	You	aren’t	going	to	go	for	a	“high”	and	crash	later.	You	will
discover	there	is	an	automatic	teacher	within	yourself.

Eventually	you	will	discover	your	inner	Self.	You	always	unconsciously

knew	it	was	there.	When	you	come	upon	it,	you	will	understand	what	the	great
sages	of	history	were	trying	to	convey.	You	will	understand	it	because	Truth	is
self-evident	and	within	your	own	Self.

This	book	is	written	with	you,	the	reader,	constantly	in	mind.	It	is	easy,

effortless,	and	enjoyable.	There	is	nothing	to	learn	or	memorize.	You	will
become	lighter	and	happier	as	you	read	it.	The	material	will	automatically	start
bringing	you	the	experience	of	freedom	as	you	read	through	the	pages.	You	are
going	to	feel	the	weights	being	removed.	Everything	you	do	will	become	more
enjoyable.	You	are	in	for	some	happy	surprises	about	your	life!	Things	are	going
to	get	better	and	better!

It’s	okay	to	be	skeptical.	We’ve	been	taken	down	the	primrose	path	before,

so	be	as	skeptical	as	you	like.	Indeed,	it’s	advisable	to	avoid	gushing	enthusiasm.

It	is	a	setup	for	a	letdown	later.	Therefore,	rather	than	enthusiasm,	quiet
observation	will	serve	you	better.

Is	there	such	a	thing	as	something	for	nothing	in	the	universe?	Oh,	yes,	most

certainly	there	is.	It’s	your	own	freedom	which	you	have	forgotten	and	don’t
know	how	to	experience.	What	is	being	offered	to	you	is	not	something	that	has
to	be	acquired.	It	is	not	something	that	is	new	or	outside	of	yourself.	It	is	already
yours	and	merely	has	to	be	reawakened	and	rediscovered.	It	will	emerge	of	its
own	nature.

The	purpose	of	sharing	this	approach	is	merely	to	put	you	in	touch	with
your	own	inner	feelings	and	experiences.	In	addition,	there	is	much	helpful
information	that	your	mind	will	want	to	know.	The	process	of	surrender	will
begin	automatically,	for	it	is	the	nature	of	the	mind	to	seek	relief	from	pain	and
suffering	and	to	experience	greater	happiness.

CHAPTER

2

THE	MECHANISM	OF	LETTING	GO

What	is	it?
Letting	go	is	like	the	sudden	cessation	of	an	inner	pressure	or	the	dropping	of	a
weight.	It	is	accompanied	by	a	sudden	feeling	of	relief	and	lightness,	with	an
increased	happiness	and	freedom.	It	is	an	actual	mechanism	of	the	mind,	and
everyone	has	experienced	it	on	occasion.

A	good	example	is	the	following.	You	are	in	the	midst	of	an	intense
argument;	you	are	angry	and	upset,	when	suddenly	the	whole	thing	strikes	you
as	absurd	and	ridiculous.	You	start	to	laugh.	The	pressure	is	relieved.	You	come
up	from	anger,	fear,	and	feeling	attacked	to	feeling	suddenly	free	and	happy.

Think	how	great	it	would	be	if	you	could	do	that	all	of	the	time,	in	any
place,	and	with	any	event.	You	could	always	feel	free	and	happy	and	never	be
cornered	by	your	feelings	again.	That’s	what	this	technique	is	all	about:	letting
go	consciously	and	frequently	at	will.	You	are	then	in	charge	of	how	you	feel,
and	you	are	no	longer	at	the	mercy	of	the	world	and	your	reactions	to	it.	You	are
no	longer	the	victim.	This	is	employing	the	basic	teaching	of	the	Buddha,	which
removes	the	pressure	of	involuntary	reactivity.

We	carry	around	with	us	a	huge	reservoir	of	accumulated	negative	feelings,

attitudes,	and	beliefs.	The	accumulated	pressure	makes	us	miserable	and	is	the
basis	of	many	of	our	illnesses	and	problems.	We	are	resigned	to	it	and	explain	it
away	as	the	“human	condition.”	We	seek	to	escape	from	it	in	myriad	ways.	The
average	human	life	is	spent	trying	to	avoid	and	run	from	the	inner	turmoil	of	fear
and	the	threat	of	misery.	Everyone’s	self-esteem	is	constantly	threatened	both
from	within	and	without.

	
If	we	take	a	close	look	at	human	life,	we	see	that	it	is	essentially	one	long

elaborate	struggle	to	escape	our	inner	fears	and	expectations	that	have	been
projected	upon	the	world.	Interspersed	are	periods	of	celebration	when	we	have
momentarily	escaped	the	inner	fears,	but	the	fears	are	still	there	waiting	for	us.
We	have	become	afraid	of	our	inner	feelings	because	they	hold	such	a	massive
amount	of	negativity	that	we	fear	we	would	be	overwhelmed	by	it	if	we	were	to
take	a	deeper	look.	We	have	a	fear	of	these	feelings	because	we	have	no
conscious	mechanism	by	which	to	handle	the	feelings	if	we	let	them	come	up
within	ourselves.	Because	we	are	afraid	to	face	them,	they	continue	to
accumulate	and,	finally,	we	secretly	begin	looking	forward	to	death	to	bring	all
of	the	pain	to	an	end.	It	is	not	thoughts	or	facts	that	are	painful	but	the	feelings
that	accompany	them.	Thoughts	in	and	of	themselves	are	painless,	but	not	the
feelings	that	underlie	them!

It	is	the	accumulated	pressure	of	feelings	that	causes	thoughts.	One
feeling,	for	instance,	can	create	literally	thousands	of	thoughts	over	a	period	of
time.	Think,	for	instance,	of	one	painful	memory	from	early	life,	one	terrible
regret	that	has	been	hidden.	Look	at	all	the	years	and	years	of	thoughts
associated	with	that	single	event.	If	we	could	surrender	the	underlying	painful
feeling,	all	of	those	thoughts	would	disappear	instantly	and	we	would	forget	the
event.

This	observation	is	in	accord	with	scientific	research.	The	Gray-LaViolette

scientific	theory	integrates	psychology	and	neurophysiology.	Their	research
demonstrated	that	feeling	tones	organize	thoughts	and	memory	(Gray-
LaViolette,	1981).	Thoughts	are	filed	in	the	memory	bank	according	to	the
various	shades	of	feelings	associated	with	those	thoughts.	Therefore,	when	we
relinquish	or	let	go	of	a	feeling,	we	are	freeing	ourselves	from	all	of	the
associated	thoughts.

The	great	value	of	knowing	how	to	surrender	is	that	any	and	all	feelings	can

be	let	go	of	at	any	time	and	any	place	in	an	instant,	and	it	can	be	done
continuously	and	effortlessly.

What	is	the	surrendered	state?	It	means	to	be	free	of	negative	feelings	in	a
given	area	so	that	creativity	and	spontaneity	can	manifest	without	opposition	or
the	interference	of	inner	conflicts.	To	be	free	of	inner	conflict	and	expectations	is
to	give	others	in	our	life	the	greatest	freedom.	It	allows	us	to	experience	the
basic	nature	of	the	universe,	which,	it	will	be	discovered,	is	to	manifest	the
greatest	good	possible	in	a	situation.	This	may	sound	philosophical,	but,	when
done,	it	is	experientially	true.

Feelings	and	Mental	Mechanisms

We	have	three	major	ways	of	handling	feelings:	suppression,	expression,	and
escape.	We	will	discuss	each	in	turn.

1.	Suppression	and	repression.	These	are	the	most	common	ways	in	which	we
push	feelings	down	and	put	them	aside.	In	repression,	this	happens
unconsciously;	in	suppression,	it	happens	consciously.	We	don’t	want	to	be
bothered	by	feelings	and,	besides,	we	don’t	know	what	else	to	do	with	them.	We
sort	of	suffer	through	them	and	try	to	keep	functioning	as	best	as	we	can.	The
feelings	that	we	select	to	be	suppressed	or	repressed	are	in	accord	with	the
conscious	and	unconscious	programs	that	we	carry	within	us	from	social	custom
and	family	training.	The	pressure	of	suppressed	feelings	is	later	felt	as
irritability,	mood	swings,	tension	in	the	muscles	of	the	neck	and	back,
headaches,	cramps,	menstrual	disorders,	colitis,	indigestion,	insomnia,
hypertension,	allergies,	and	other	somatic	conditions.

When	we	repress	a	feeling,	it	is	because	there	is	so	much	guilt	and	fear	over

the	feeling	that	it	is	not	even	consciously	felt	at	all.	It	becomes	instantly	thrust
into	the	unconscious	as	soon	as	it	threatens	to	emerge.	The	repressed	feeling	is
then	handled	in	a	variety	of	ways	to	ensure	that	it	stays	repressed	and	out	of
awareness.

Of	these	mechanisms	used	by	the	mind	to	keep	the	feeling	repressed,	denial
and	projection	are	perhaps	the	best-known	methods,	as	they	tend	to	go	together
and	reinforce	each	other.	Denial	results	in	major	emotional	and	maturational
blocks.	It	is	usually	accompanied	by	the	mechanism	of	projection.	Because	of
guilt	and	fear,	we	repress	the	impulse	or	feeling,	and	we	deny	its	presence	within
us.	Instead	of	feeling	it,	we	project	it	onto	the	world	and	those	around	us.	We
experience	the	feeling	as	if	it	belonged	to	“them.”	“They”	then	become	the
enemy,	and	the	mind	searches	for	and	finds	justification	to	reinforce	the
projection.	Blame	is	placed	on	people,	places,	institutions,	food,	climatic
conditions,	astrological	events,	social	conditions,	fate,	God,	luck,	the	devil,
foreigners,	ethnic	groups,	political	rivals,	and	other	things	outside	of	ourselves.
Projection	is	the	main	mechanism	in	use	by	the	world	today.	It	accounts	for	all
wars,	strife,	and	civil	disorder.	Hating	the	enemy	is	even	encouraged	in	order	to
become	a	“good	citizen.”	We	maintain	our	own	self-esteem	at	the	expense	of
others	and,	eventually,	this	results	in	social	breakdown.	The	mechanism	of
projection	underlies	all	attack,	violence,	aggression,	and	every	form	of	social
destruction.

2.	Expression.	With	this	mechanism,	the	feeling	is	vented,	verbalized,	or	stated
in	body	language,	and	acted	out	in	endless	group	demonstrations.	The	expression

of	negative	feelings	allows	just	enough	of	the	inner	pressure	to	be	let	out	so	that
the	remainder	can	then	be	suppressed.	This	is	a	very	important	point	to
understand,	for	many	people	in	society	today	believe	that	expressing	their
feelings	frees	them	from	the	feelings.	The	facts	are	to	the	contrary.	The
expression	of	a	feeling,	first,	tends	to	propagate	that	feeling	and	give	it	greater
energy.	Second,	the	expression	of	the	feeling	merely	allows	the	remainder	to	be
suppressed	out	of	awareness.

The	balance	between	suppression	and	expression	varies	in	each	individual
depending	on	early	training,	current	cultural	norms	and	mores,	and	the	media.
Expressing	oneself	is	now	in	vogue	as	a	result	of	a	misunderstanding	of	the	work
of	Sigmund	Freud	and	psychoanalysis.	Freud	pointed	out	that	suppression	was
the	cause	of	neurosis;	therefore,	expression	was	mistakenly	thought	to	be	the
cure.	This	misinterpretation	became	a	license	for	self-indulgence	at	the	cost	of
others.	What	Freud	actually	said,	in	classical	psychoanalysis,	was	that	the
repressed	impulse	or	feeling	was	to	be	neutralized,	sublimated,	socialized,	and
channeled	into	constructive	drives	of	love,	work	and	creativity.

If	we	dump	our	negative	feelings	on	others,	they	experience	it	as	an	attack

and	they,	in	turn,	are	forced	to	suppress,	express,	or	escape	the	feelings;
therefore,	the	expression	of	negativity	results	in	the	deterioration	and	destruction
of	relationships.	A	far	better	alternative	is	to	take	responsibility	for	our	own
feelings	and	neutralize	them.	Then,	only	positive	feelings	remain	to	be
expressed.

3.	Escape.	Escape	is	the	avoidance	of	feelings	through	diversion.	This	avoidance
is	the	backbone	of	the	entertainment	and	liquor	industries,	and	also	the	route	of
the	workaholic.	Escapism	and	avoidance	of	inner	awareness	is	a	socially
condoned	mechanism.	We	can	avoid	our	own	inner	selves	and	keep	our	feelings
from	emerging	by	an	endless	variety	of	pursuits,	many	of	which	eventually
become	addictions	as	our	dependency	upon	them	grows.

People	are	desperate	to	stay	unconscious.	We	observe	how	often	people
flick	on	the	television	set	the	minute	they	enter	a	room	and	then	walk	around	in	a
dream-like	state,	constantly	being	programmed	by	the	data	poured	into	them.
People	are	terrified	of	facing	themselves.	They	dread	even	a	moment	of
aloneness.	Thus	the	constant	frantic	activities:	the	endless	socializing,	talking,
texting,	reading,	music	playing,	working,	traveling,	sightseeing,	shopping,
overeating,	gambling,	movie-going,	pill-taking,	drug-using,	and	cocktail-
partying.

Many	of	the	foregoing	mechanisms	of	escape	are	faulty,	stressful,	and
ineffective.	Each	of	them	requires	increasing	amounts	of	energy	in	and	of	itself.

Enormous	amounts	of	energy	are	required	to	keep	down	the	growing	pressure	of
the	suppressed	and	repressed	feelings.	There	is	a	progressive	loss	of	awareness
and	an	arrest	of	growth.	There	is	a	loss	of	creativity,	energy,	and	real	interest	in
others.	There	is	a	halting	of	spiritual	growth	and	eventually	the	development	of
physical	and	emotional	illness,	disease,	aging,	and	premature	death.	The
projection	of	these	repressed	feelings	results	in	the	social	problems,	disorders,
and	the	increase	of	selfishness	and	callousness	characteristic	of	our	present
society.	Most	of	all,	the	effect	is	the	inability	to	truly	love	and	trust	another
person,	which	results	in	emotional	isolation	and	self-hatred.

In	contrast	to	the	above,	what	happens	instead	when	we	let	go	of	a	feeling?

The	energy	behind	the	feeling	is	instantly	surrendered	and	the	net	effect	is
decompression.	The	accumulated	pressure	begins	to	decrease	as	we	constantly
let	go.	Everyone	knows	that,	when	we	let	go,	we	immediately	feel	better.	The
body’s	physiology	changes.	There	are	detectable	improvements	in	skin	color,
breathing,	pulse,	blood	pressure,	muscle	tension,	gastro-intestinal	function,	and
blood	chemistries.	In	the	state	of	inner	freedom,	all	bodily	functions	and	organs
move	in	the	general	direction	of	normalcy	and	health.	There	is	an	immediate
increase	in	muscle	power.	Vision	improves	and	our	perception	of	the	world	and
ourselves	changes	for	the	better.	We	feel	happier,	more	loving,	and	more
easygoing.

Feelings	and	Stress
There	is	much	attention	and	publicity	given	to	the	subject	of	stress	without	a	real
understanding	of	its	essential	nature.	It	is	said	that	we	are	more	stress-prone	than
ever.	What	is	the	essential	cause	of	stress?	Certainly	it	is	not	the	external
precipitating	factors.	They	are	merely	examples	of	the	mechanism	we	described
as	projection.	It	is	“they”	or	“it”	that	is	thought	to	be	the	culprit	when,	in	fact,
what	we	are	feeling	is	merely	the	letting	out	of	the	inner	pressure	of	repressed
emotions.	It	is	these	repressed	feelings	that	make	us	vulnerable	to	external	stress.
The	real	source	of	“stress”	is	actually	internal;	it	is	not	external,	as	people
would	like	to	believe.	The	readiness	to	react	with	fear,	for	instance,	depends	on
how	much	fear	is	already	present	within	to	be	triggered	by	a	stimulus.	The	more
fear	we	have	on	the	inside,	the	more	our	perception	of	the	world	is	changed	to	a
fearful,	guarded	expectancy.	To	the	fearful	person,	this	world	is	a	terrifying
place.	To	the	angry	person,	this	world	is	a	chaos	of	frustration	and	vexation.	To
the	guilty	person,	it	is	a	world	of	temptation	and	sin,	which	they	see	everywhere.
What	we	are	holding	inside	colors	our	world.	If	we	let	go	of	guilt,	we	will	see
innocence;	however,	a	guilt-ridden	person	will	see	only	evil.	The	basic	rule	is
that	we	focus	on	what	we	have	repressed.

Stress	results	from	the	accumulated	pressure	of	our	repressed	and
suppressed	feelings.	The	pressure	seeks	relief,	and	so	external	events	only
trigger	what	we	have	been	holding	down,	both	consciously	and	unconsciously.
The	energy	of	our	blocked-off	feelings	re-emerges	through	our	autonomic
nervous	system	and	causes	pathological	changes	leading	to	disease	processes.	A
negative	feeling	instantly	causes	a	loss	of	50%	of	the	body’s	muscle	strength	and
also	narrows	our	vision	both	physically	and	mentally.	Stress	is	our	emotional
reaction	to	a	precipitating	factor	or	stimulus.	Stress	is	determined	by	our	belief
systems	and	their	associated	emotional	pressures.	It	is	not	the	external	stimulus,
then,	that	is	the	cause	of	stress,	but	our	degree	of	reactivity.	The	more
surrendered	we	are,	the	less	prone	we	are	to	stress.	The	damage	caused	by	stress
is	merely	the	result	of	our	own	emotions.	The	effectiveness	of	letting	go	and
reducing	the	body’s	response	to	stress	has	been	demonstrated	in	scientific
studies	(see	Chapter	14).

Many	stress-reduction	programs	offered	today	often	miss	the	essential	point.

They	try	to	relieve	the	after-effects	of	stress	rather	than	remove	the	cause	of	the
stress	itself,	or	they	concentrate	on	external	events.	This	is	like	trying	to	reduce
the	fever	without	correcting	the	infection.	For	instance,	muscle	tension	is	the
aftermath	of	anxiety,	fear,	anger,	and	guilt.	A	course	in	the	techniques	of	muscle
relaxation	is	going	to	be	of	very	limited	benefit.	It	would	be	far	more	effective,
instead,	to	remove	the	source	of	the	underlying	tension,	which	is	the	repressed
and	suppressed	anger,	fear,	guilt,	or	other	negative	feelings.

Life	Events	and	Emotions
The	rationalizing	mind	prefers	to	keep	the	true	causes	of	emotion	out	of
awareness	and	utilizes	the	mechanism	of	projection	to	do	this.	It	blames	events
or	other	people	for	“causing”	a	feeling	and	views	itself	as	the	helpless	innocent
victim	of	external	causes.	“They	made	me	angry.”	“He	got	me	upset.”	“It	scared
me.”	“World	events	are	the	cause	of	my	anxiety.”	Actually,	it’s	the	exact
opposite.	The	suppressed	and	repressed	feelings	seek	an	outlet	and	utilize	the
events	as	triggers	and	excuses	to	vent	themselves.	We	are	like	pressure-cookers
ready	to	release	steam	when	the	opportunity	arises.	Our	triggers	are	set	and
ready	to	go	off.	In	psychiatry,	this	mechanism	is	called	displacement.	It	is
because	we	are	angry	that	events	“make”	us	angry.	If,	through	constant
surrendering,	we	have	let	go	of	the	pent-up	store	of	anger,	it	is	very	difficult	and,
in	fact,	even	impossible	for	anyone	or	any	situation	to	“make”	us	angry.	The
same,	therefore,	goes	for	all	other	negative	feelings	once	they	have	been
surrendered.

Because	of	social	conditioning	in	our	society,	people	even	suppress	and

repress	their	positive	feelings.	Suppressed	love	results	in	the	broken	heart	of	the
heart	attack.	Suppressed	love	re-emerges	as	excessive	adoration	of	pets	and
various	forms	of	idolatry.	True	love	is	free	of	fear	and	characterized	by	non-
attachment.	Fear	of	loss	energizes	undue	attachment	and	possessiveness.	For
example,	the	man	who	is	insecure	about	his	girlfriend	is	very	jealous.

When	the	pressure	of	suppressed	and	repressed	feelings	exceeds	the
individual’s	tolerance	level,	the	mind	will	create	an	event	“out	there”	upon
which	to	vent	and	displace	itself.	Thus,	the	person	with	a	lot	of	repressed	grief
will	unconsciously	create	sad	events	in	life.	The	fearful	person	precipitates
frightening	experiences;	the	angry	person	becomes	surrounded	by	infuriating
circumstances;	and	the	prideful	person	is	constantly	being	insulted.	As	Jesus
Christ	said,	“Why	do	you	see	the	splinter	which	is	in	your	brother’s	eye,	and	do
not	feel	the	beam	which	is	in	your	own	eye	(Matthew	7:3)?”	All	the	Great
Masters	point	us	within.

Everything	in	the	universe	emits	a	vibration.	The	higher	the	vibration,	the

more	power	it	has.	Emotions,	also,	because	they	are	energy,	emit	vibrations.
These	emotional	vibrations	impact	the	body’s	energy	fields	and	reveal	effects
that	can	be	seen,	felt,	and	measured.	Motion	pictures	using	Kirlian	photography,
such	as	those	done	by	Dr.	Thelma	Moss,	show	rapid	fluctuations	of	the	color	and
size	of	the	energy	field	with	changes	of	emotions	(Krippner,	1974).	The	energy
field	has	traditionally	been	called	an	“aura”	and	can	be	seen	by	people	who	have
been	born	with	or	learned	the	ability	to	see	vibrations	of	that	frequency.	The	aura
changes	color	and	size	with	emotions.	Muscle-testing	also	demonstrates	the
energy	changes	that	accompany	emotions,	as	our	body’s	muscles	instantly
respond	to	positive	and	negative	stimuli.	Thus,	our	basic	emotional	states
transmit	themselves	to	the	universe.

The	mind	has	no	dimensions	or	size	and	is	not	limited	in	space;	therefore,

the	mind	transmits	its	basic	state	via	vibrational	energy	over	an	unlimited
distance.	This	means	that	we	routinely	and	unwittingly	affect	others	by	our
emotional	state	and	thoughts.	Emotional	patterns	and	their	associated	thought
forms,	for	instance,	can	be	picked	up	and	received	consciously	by	psychics	at	a
great	distance.	This	can	be	demonstrated	experimentally,	and	the	scientific	basis
for	this	has	been	a	subject	of	great	interest	in	advanced	quantum	physics.

Because	emotions	emit	a	vibrational	energy	field,	they	affect	and	determine
the	people	who	are	in	our	lives.	Life	events	become	influenced	by	our	repressed
and	suppressed	emotions	on	the	psychic	level.	Thus	anger	attracts	angry
thoughts.	The	basic	rule	of	the	psychic	universe	is	that	“like	attracts	like.”
Similarly,	“love	promotes	love,”	so	that	the	person	who	has	let	go	of	a	lot	of
inner	negativity	is	surrounded	by	loving	thoughts,	loving	events,	loving	people,

and	loving	pets.	This	phenomenon	explains	many	scriptural	quotations	and
common	sayings	that	have	puzzled	the	intellect,	such	as,	“The	rich	get	richer	and
the	poor	get	poorer,”	and	“Those	who	have,	get.”	As	a	general	rule,	therefore,
people	who	are	carrying	the	consciousness	of	apathy	bring	poverty
circumstances	into	their	lives,	and	those	with	a	prosperity	consciousness	bring
abundance	into	their	lives.

Because	all	living	things	are	connected	on	vibrational	energy	levels,	our
basic	emotional	state	is	picked	up	and	reacted	to	by	all	life	forms	around	us.	It	is
well	known	that	animals	can	instantly	read	a	person’s	basic	emotional	state.
There	are	experiments	demonstrating	that	even	the	growth	of	bacteria	is	affected
by	human	emotions,	and	that	plants	register	measurable	reactions	to	our
emotional	state	(Backster,	2003).

The	Mechanism	of	Letting	Go
Letting	go	involves	being	aware	of	a	feeling,	letting	it	come	up,	staying	with	it,
and	letting	it	run	its	course	without	wanting	to	make	it	different	or	do	anything
about	it.	It	means	simply	to	let	the	feeling	be	there	and	to	focus	on	letting	out	the
energy	behind	it.	The	first	step	is	to	allow	yourself	to	have	the	feeling	without
resisting	it,	venting	it,	fearing	it,	condemning	it,	or	moralizing	about	it.	It	means
to	drop	judgment	and	to	see	that	it	is	just	a	feeling.	The	technique	is	to	be	with
the	feeling	and	surrender	all	efforts	to	modify	it	in	any	way.	Let	go	of	wanting	to
resist	the	feeling.	It	is	resistance	that	keeps	the	feeling	going.	When	you	give	up
resisting	or	trying	to	modify	the	feeling,	it	will	shift	to	the	next	feeling	and	be
accompanied	by	a	lighter	sensation.	A	feeling	that	is	not	resisted	will	disappear
as	the	energy	behind	it	dissipates.

As	you	begin	the	process,	you	will	notice	that	you	have	fear	and	guilt	over

having	feelings;	there	will	be	resistance	to	feelings	in	general.	To	let	feelings
come	up,	it	is	easier	to	let	go	of	the	reaction	to	having	the	feelings	in	the	first
place.	A	fear	of	fear	itself	is	a	prime	example	of	this.	Let	go	of	the	fear	or	guilt
that	you	have	about	the	feeling	first,	and	then	get	into	the	feeling	itself.

When	letting	go,	ignore	all	thoughts.	Focus	on	the	feeling	itself,	not	on	the
thoughts.	Thoughts	are	endless	and	self-reinforcing,	and	they	only	breed	more
thoughts.	Thoughts	are	merely	rationalizations	of	the	mind	to	try	and	explain	the
presence	of	the	feeling.	The	real	reason	for	the	feeling	is	the	accumulated
pressure	behind	the	feeling	that	is	forcing	it	to	come	up	in	the	moment.	The
thoughts	or	external	events	are	only	an	excuse	made	up	by	the	mind.

As	we	become	more	familiar	with	letting	go,	it	will	be	noticed	that	all
negative	feelings	are	associated	with	our	basic	fear	related	to	survival	and	that
all	feelings	are	merely	survival	programs	that	the	mind	believes	are	necessary.

The	letting	go	technique	undoes	the	programs	progressively.	Through	that
process,	the	underlying	motive	behind	the	feelings	becomes	more	and	more
apparent.

To	be	surrendered	means	to	have	no	strong	emotion	about	a	thing:	“It’s

okay	if	it	happens,	and	it’s	okay	if	it	doesn’t.”	When	we	are	free,	there	is	a
letting	go	of	attachments.	We	can	enjoy	a	thing,	but	we	don’t	need	it	for	our
happiness.	There	is	progressive	diminishing	of	dependence	on	anything	or
anyone	outside	of	ourselves.	These	principles	are	in	accord	with	the	basic
teaching	of	the	Buddha	to	avoid	attachment	to	worldly	phenomena,	as	well	as
the	basic	teaching	of	Jesus	Christ	to	“be	in	the	world	but	not	of	it.”

Sometimes	we	surrender	a	feeling	and	we	notice	that	it	returns	or	continues.

This	is	because	there	is	more	of	it	yet	to	be	surrendered.	We	have	stuffed	these
feelings	all	of	our	lives	and	there	can	be	a	lot	of	energy	pushed	down	that	needs
to	come	up	and	be	acknowledged.	When	surrender	occurs,	there	is	an	immediate
lighter,	happier	feeling,	almost	like	a	“high.”

By	continuously	letting	go,	it	is	possible	to	stay	in	that	state	of	freedom.
Feelings	come	and	go,	and	eventually	you	realize	that	you	are	not	your	feelings,
but	that	the	real	“you”	is	merely	witnessing	them.	You	stop	identifying	with
them.	The	“you”	that	is	observing	and	is	aware	of	what	is	happening	always
stays	the	same.	As	you	become	more	and	more	aware	of	the	changeless	witness
within,	you	begin	to	identify	with	that	level	of	consciousness.	You	become
progressively	primarily	the	witness	rather	than	the	experiencer	of	phenomena.
You	get	closer	and	closer	to	the	real	Self	and	begin	to	see	that	you	had	been
duped	by	feelings	all	along.	You	thought	that	you	were	the	victim	of	your
feelings.	Now	you	see	that	they	are	not	the	truth	about	yourself;	they	are	merely
created	by	the	ego,	that	collector	of	programs	which	the	mind	has	mistakenly
believed	are	necessary	for	survival.

The	results	of	letting	go	are	deceptively	quick	and	subtle,	but	the	effects	are

very	powerful.	Often	we	have	let	go	but	think	that	we	haven’t.	It	will	be	our
friends	who	make	us	aware	of	the	change.	One	reason	for	this	phenomenon	is
that,	when	something	is	fully	surrendered,	it	disappears	from	consciousness.
Now,	because	we	never	think	of	it,	we	don’t	realize	that	it	has	gone.	This	is	a
common	phenomenon	among	people	who	are	growing	in	consciousness.	We	are
not	aware	of	all	the	coal	that	we	have	shoveled;	we	are	always	looking	at	the
shovelful	we	are	handling	right	now.	We	don’t	realize	how	much	the	pile	has
gone	down.	Often	our	friends	and	family	are	the	first	ones	to	notice.

To	keep	track	of	progress,	many	people	keep	a	chart	of	their	gains.	This

helps	to	overcome	the	resistance	that	usually	takes	the	form,	“This	isn’t
working.”	It	is	common	for	people	who	have	made	enormous	gains	to	claim,	“It

just	isn’t	working.”	We	have	to	remind	ourselves	sometimes	what	we	were	like
before	we	started	this	process.

Resistance	to	Letting	Go
Letting	go	of	negative	feelings	is	the	undoing	of	the	ego,	which	will	be	resistant
at	every	turn.	This	may	result	in	skepticism	about	the	technique,	“forgetting”	to
surrender,	a	sudden	upsurge	of	escapism,	or	venting	feelings	by	expressing	and
acting	out.	The	solution	is	simply	to	keep	on	letting	go	of	the	feelings	you	have
about	the	whole	process.	Let	the	resistance	be	there	but	don’t	resist	the
resistance.

You	are	free.	You	don’t	have	to	let	go.	Nobody	is	forcing	you.	Look	at	the

fear	behind	the	resistance.	What	are	you	afraid	of	regarding	this	process?	Are
you	willing	to	let	go	of	that?	Keep	letting	go	of	every	fear	as	it	arises,	and	the
resistance	will	resolve.

Let’s	not	forget	that	we	are	letting	go	of	all	the	programs	that	have	made	us
a	slave	and	a	victim	for	a	long	time.	These	programs	have	blinded	us	to	the	truth
of	our	real	identity.	The	ego	is	losing	ground	and	will	try	tricks	and	bluffs.	Once
we	start	letting	go,	its	days	are	numbered	and	its	power	is	diminishing.	One	of	its
tricks	is	to	go	unconscious	about	the	technique	itself,	for	instance,	to	decide
suddenly	that	the	mechanism	of	surrender	isn’t	working,	things	are	still	the
same,	it	is	confusing,	and	too	hard	to	remember	and	do.	This	is	a	sign	of	real
progress!	It	means	that	the	ego	knows	we	have	a	knife	with	which	to	cut
ourselves	free	and	it	is	losing	ground.	The	ego	is	not	our	friend.	Like	“master
control”	in	Tron	(1982),	it	wants	to	keep	us	enslaved	by	its	programs.

Letting	go	is	a	natural	ability.	It	is	not	something	new	or	foreign.	It	is	not	an

esoteric	teaching	or	somebody	else’s	idea	or	a	belief	system.	We	are	merely
utilizing	our	own	inner	nature	to	get	freer	and	happier.	When	letting	go,	it’s	not
helpful	to	“think”	about	the	technique.	It’s	better,	simply,	just	to	do	it.
Eventually	it	will	be	seen	that	all	thoughts	are	resistance.	They	are	all	images
that	the	mind	has	made	to	prevent	us	from	experiencing	what	actually	is.	When
we	have	been	letting	go	for	a	while	and	have	begun	experiencing	what	is	really
going	on,	we	will	laugh	at	our	thoughts.	Thoughts	are	fakes,	absurd	make-beliefs
that	obscure	the	truth.	Pursuing	thoughts	can	keep	us	occupied	endlessly.	We
will	discover	one	day	that	we	are	right	where	we	started.	Thoughts	are	like	gold
fish	in	a	bowl;	the	real	Self	is	like	the	water.	The	real	Self	is	the	space	between
the	thoughts,	or	more	exactly,	the	field	of	silent	awareness	underneath	all
thoughts.

We	have	had	the	experience	of	being	totally	absorbed	in	what	we	were
doing,	when	we	scarcely	noticed	the	passage	of	time.	The	mind	was	very	quiet,

and	we	were	simply	doing	what	we	were	doing	without	resistance	or	effort.	We
felt	happy,	maybe	humming	to	ourselves.	We	functioned	without	stress.	We
were	very	relaxed,	although	busy.	We	suddenly	realized	that	we	never	needed	all
those	thoughts	after	all.	Thoughts	are	like	bait	to	a	fish;	if	we	bite	at	them,	we
get	caught.	It’s	best	not	to	bite	at	the	thoughts.	We	don’t	need	them.

Inside	of	us,	but	out	of	awareness,	is	the	truth	that	“I	already	know

everything	I	need	to	know.”	This	happens	automatically.

Paradoxically,	one	resistance	to	surrendering	is	due	to	the	effectiveness	of
the	technique.	What	happens	is	that	we	keep	letting	go	when	life	is	not	going	too
well	and	we	are	beset	by	unpleasant	emotions.	As	we	finally	surrender	our	way
out	of	it	and	all	is	well,	then	we	stop	letting	go.	This	is	a	mistake	because,	as
good	as	we	may	feel,	there	is	usually	more	to	it.	Take	advantage	of	the	higher
states	and	the	momentum	of	letting	go.	Keep	on	going	because	it	will	get	better
and	better	all	the	time.	Letting	go	gains	a	certain	momentum.	It	is	easy	to	keep	it
going	once	it	is	started.	The	higher	we	feel,	the	easier	it	is	to	let	go.	That’s	a
good	time	to	reach	down	and	let	go	of	some	things	(suppressed	and	repressed
“garbage”)	that	we	wouldn’t	want	to	tackle	if	we	were	in	the	dumps.	There	is
always	a	feeling	to	be	let	up	and	surrendered.	When	we	are	feeling	good,	the
emotions	are	merely	subtler.

Sometimes	you	will	feel	stuck	with	a	particular	feeling.	Simply	surrender	to

the	feeling	of	being	stuck.	Just	let	it	be	there	and	don’t	resist	it.	If	it	doesn’t
disappear,	see	if	you	can	let	go	of	the	feeling	in	bits	and	pieces.

Another	block	that	may	occur	is	the	fear	that	if	we	let	go	of	a	desire	for
something,	we	won’t	get	it.	It	is	often	beneficial	to	look	at	some	commonly	held
beliefs	and	let	go	of	them	right	in	the	beginning,	such	as:	(1)	We	only	deserve
things	through	hard	work,	struggle,	sacrifice,	and	effort;	(2)	Suffering	is
beneficial	and	good	for	us;	(3)	We	don’t	get	anything	for	nothing;	(4)	Things
that	are	very	simple	aren’t	worth	much.	Letting	go	of	some	of	these
psychological	barriers	to	the	technique	itself	will	allow	an	enjoyment	of	its
effortlessness	and	ease.

CHAPTER

3

THE	ANATOMY	OF	EMOTIONS

There	are	numerous	complicated	psychologies	of	the	human	emotions.	They
often	involve	considerable	symbology	and	references	to	mythology,	and	they	are
based	on	hypotheses	that	are	hotly	debated.	As	a	result,	there	are	various	schools
of	psychotherapy	with	their	different	aims	and	methods.	Simplicity	is	one	of	the
earmarks	of	truth,	and	so	we	will	describe	a	simple,	workable,	testable	map	of
the	emotions	that	can	be	verified	by	subjective	experience,	as	well	as	by
objective	testing.

The	Goal	of	Survival
Whichever	psychology	is	studied	reveals	that	the	primary	human	goal,
superseding	all	others,	is	survival.	Every	human	desire	seeks	to	ensure	one’s
personal	survival	and	the	survival	of	one’s	identified	groups,	such	as	family,
loved	ones,	and	country.	Humans	fear,	most	of	all,	the	loss	of	the	capacity	to
experience.	To	that	end,	people	are	interested	in	the	survival	of	the	body	because
they	believe	that	they	are	the	body	and,	therefore,	they	need	the	body	to
experience	their	existence.	Because	people	view	themselves	as	separate	and
limited,	they	are	stressed	by	their	sense	of	lack.	It	is	common	for	humans	to	look
outside	of	themselves	for	the	satisfaction	of	their	needs.	This	leads	them	to
experience	themselves	as	vulnerable	because	they	are	insufficient	unto
themselves.

The	mind	is,	therefore,	a	survival	mechanism,	and	its	method	of	survival	is

primarily	the	use	of	emotions.	Thoughts	are	engendered	by	the	emotions	and,
eventually,	emotions	become	shorthand	for	thoughts.	Thousands	and	even

	
millions	of	thoughts	can	be	replaced	by	a	single	emotion.	Emotions	are	more
basic	and	primitive	than	mental	processes.	Reason	is	the	tool	the	mind	uses	to
achieve	its	emotional	ends.	When	used	by	the	intellect,	the	basic	underlying
emotion	is	usually	unconscious	or	at	least	out	of	awareness.	When	the
underlying	emotion	is	forgotten	or	ignored	and	not	experienced,	people	are
unaware	of	the	reason	for	their	actions	and	they	develop	all	kinds	of	plausible
reasons.	In	fact,	they	frequently	do	not	know	why	they	are	doing	what	they	are
doing.

There	is	a	simple	way	to	become	conscious	of	the	underlying	emotional
goal	behind	any	activity	through	use	of	the	question,	“What	for?”	With	each
answer,	“What	for?”	is	asked	again	and	again	until	the	basic	feeling	is
uncovered.	An	example	would	be	the	following.	A	man	wants	a	new	Cadillac.
His	mind	gives	all	the	logical	reasons	but	logic	doesn’t	really	explain	it.	So	he
asks	himself,	“What	do	I	want	the	Cadillac	for?”	“Well,”	he	says,	“it	is	to
achieve	status,	recognition,	respect,	and	solid	citizen	success	status.”	Again:
“What	do	I	want	status	for?”	“Respect	and	approval	from	others,”	he	might	say,
“and	to	ensure	that	respect.”	Again:	“What	do	I	want	respect	and	approval	for?”
“To	have	the	feeling	of	security.”	Again:	“What	do	I	want	security	for?”	“To
feel	happy.”	The	continual	question,	“What	for?,”	reveals	that	basically	there	are
feelings	of	insecurity,	unhappiness,	and	lack	of	fulfillment.	Every	activity	or
desire	will	reveal	that	the	basic	goal	is	to	achieve	a	certain	feeling.	There	are	no
other	goals	than	to	overcome	fear	and	achieve	happiness.	Emotions	are
connected	with	what	we	believe	will	ensure	our	survival,	not	with	what	actually
will.	Emotions	themselves	are	actually	the	cause	of	the	basic	fear	that	drives
everyone	to	seek	security	constantly.

The	Scale	of	Emotions
For	simplicity	and	clarity,	we	will	utilize	the	scale	of	emotions	that	corresponds
with	the	levels	of	consciousness.	A	thorough	presentation	of	consciousness
levels,	their	scientific	basis,	and	practical	applications	is	found	in	Power	vs.
Force:	The	Hidden	Determinants	of	Human	Behavior	(Hawkins,	[1995],
2012).

Briefly,	everything	emits	energy,	either	positive	or	negative.	Intuitively,	we

know	the	difference	between	a	positive	person	(friendly,	genuine,	considerate)
and	a	negative	one	(greedy,	deceitful,	hateful).	The	energy	of	Mother	Teresa	was
obviously	different	from	the	energy	of	Adolf	Hitler;	most	people’s	energy	is
somewhere	in	between	the	two.	Music,	places,	books,	animals,	intentions,	and
all	of	life	emit	an	energy	that	can	be	“calibrated”	as	to	its	essence	and	its	degree
of	truth.

“Like	goes	to	like.”	The	different	energies	constellate	in	“attractor	patterns”

or	“levels	of	consciousness.”	The	Map	of	Consciousness	(see	Appendix	A)
provides	a	linear,	logarithmic	view	of	this	nonlinear	energetic	terrain.	Each	level
of	consciousness	(or	attractor	pattern)	is	calibrated	on	a	logarithmic	scale	of
energetic	power,	ranging	from	1–1000.	The	level	of	Full	Enlightenment	(1000),
at	the	top	of	the	Map,	represents	the	highest	level	attainable	in	the	human	realm;
it	is	the	energy	of	Jesus	Christ,	the	Buddha,	and	Krishna.	The	level	of	Shame
(20)	is	at	the	bottom,	close	to	death,	representing	bare	survival.

The	level	of	Courage	(200)	is	the	critical	point	that	marks	the	shift	from

negative	to	positive	energy.	It	is	the	energy	of	integrity,	being	truthful,
empowerment,	and	having	the	capacity	to	cope.	The	levels	of	consciousness
below	Courage	are	destructive,	whereas	the	levels	above	it	are	life-supportive.	A
simple	muscle-test	reveals	the	difference:	negative	stimuli	(below	200)	instantly
weaken	the	muscle,	and	positive	stimuli	(above	200)	instantly	strengthen	the
muscle.	True	“power”	strengthens;	“force”	weakens.	Above	the	level	of
Courage,	people	seek	us	out	because	we	give	energy	to	them	(“power”)	and	we
have	goodwill	towards	them.	Below	the	level	of	Courage,	people	avoid	us
because	we	take	energy	from	them	(“force”)	and	we	want	to	use	them	for	our
own	material	or	emotional	needs.

Here,	we	delineate	the	basic	scale,	starting	from	the	higher	energies	down	to

the	lower:

Peace	(600):	This	is	experienced	as	perfection,	bliss,	effortlessness,	and	oneness.
It	is	a	state	of	non-duality	beyond	separateness	and	beyond	the	intellect,	as	in	the
“peace	that	passeth	all	understanding.”	It	is	described	as	Illumination	and
Enlightenment.	It	is	rare	in	the	human	realm.

Joy	(540):	Love	that	is	unconditional	and	unchanging,	despite	circumstances	and
actions	of	others.	The	world	is	illuminated	by	exquisite	beauty,	which	is	seen	in
all	things.	The	perfection	of	creation	is	self-evident.	There	is	closeness	to	unity
and	discovery	of	Self;	compassion	for	all;	enormous	patience;	the	feeling	of	at-
oneness	with	others	and	a	concern	for	their	happiness.	A	sense	of	self-
completion	and	self-sufficiency	prevails.

Love	(500):	A	way	of	being	that	is	forgiving,	nurturing,	and	supportive.	It	does
not	proceed	from	the	mind;	rather,	it	emanates	from	the	heart.	Love	focuses	on
the	essence	of	a	situation,	not	the	details.	It	deals	with	wholes,	not	particulars.	As
perception	is	replaced	with	vision,	it	takes	no	position	and	sees	the	intrinsic
value	and	lovability	of	all	that	exists.

Reason	(400):	This	aspect	differentiates	humans	from	the	animal	world.	There	is
the	ability	to	see	things	in	the	abstract,	to	conceptualize,	to	be	objective,	and	to
make	rapid	and	correct	decisions.	Its	enormous	utility	is	problem	solving.
Science,	philosophy,	medicine,	and	logic	are	expressions	of	this	level.

Acceptance	(350):	This	energy	is	easy-going,	laid	back,	harmonious,	flexible,
inclusive,	and	free	of	inner	resistance.	“Life	is	good.	You	and	I	are	good.	I	feel
connected.”	It	meets	life	on	life’s	terms.	There	is	no	need	to	blame	others	or
blame	life.

Willingness	(310):	This	energy	subserves	survival	by	virtue	of	a	positive	attitude
that	welcomes	all	expressions	of	life.	It	is	friendly,	helpful,	wants	to	assist,	and
seeks	to	be	of	service.

Neutrality	(250):	This	is	a	way	of	life	that	is	comfortable,	pragmatic,	and
relatively	free	of	emotionality.	“It’s	okay	either	way.”	It	is	free	of	rigid	positions,
nonjudgmental,	and	noncompetitive.

Courage	(200):	This	energy	says,	“I	can	do	it.”	It	is	determined,	excited	about
life,	productive,	independent,	and	self-empowered.	Effective	action	is	possible.

Pride	(175):	“My	way	is	the	best	way,”	says	this	level.	Its	focus	is	achievement,
desire	for	recognition,	specialness,	and	perfectionism.	It	feels	“better	than	…	”
and	superior	to	others.

Anger	(150):	This	energy	overcomes	the	source	of	fear	by	force,	threats,	and
attack.	It	is	irritable,	explosive,	bitter,	volatile,	and	resentful.	It	likes	to	“get
even,”	as	in	“I’ll	show	you.”

Desire	(125):	It	is	always	seeking	gain,	acquisition,	pleasure,	and	“getting”
something	outside	oneself.	It	is	insatiable,	never	satisfied,	and	craving.	“I	have	to
have	it.”	“Give	me	what	I	want,	and	give	it	to	me	now!”

Fear	(100):	This	energy	sees	“danger,”	which	is	“everywhere.”	It	is	avoidant,
defensive,	preoccupied	with	security,	possessive	of	others,	jealous,	restless,
anxious,	and	vigilant.

Grief	(75):	There	is	helplessness,	despair,	loss,	regret,	and	the	feeling,	“If	only	I
had	…	”	Separation.	Depression.	Sadness.	Being	a	“loser.”	Mournful,	as	in	“I
can’t	go	on.”

Apathy	(50):	This	energy	is	characterized	by	hopelessness,	playing	dead,	being	a
“drain”	to	others,	being	immobilized,	and	the	feelings:	“I	can’t”	and	“Who

cares?”	Poverty	is	common.

Guilt	(30):	In	this	energy	field,	one	wants	to	punish	and	be	punished.	It	leads	to
self-rejection,	masochism,	remorse,	“feeling	bad,”	and	self-sabotage.	“It’s	all	my
fault.”	Accident-proneness,	suicidal	behavior,	and	projection	of	self-hatred	onto
“evil”	others	are	common.	It	is	the	basis	of	many	psychosomatic	illnesses.

Shame	(20):	Characterized	by	humiliation,	as	in	“hanging	your	head	in	shame.”
It	is	traditionally	accompanied	by	banishment.	It	is	destructive	to	health	and
leads	to	cruelty	toward	self	and	others.

In	general,	we	can	say	that	the	lower	end	of	the	scale	is	associated	with

lower	vibrational	frequencies:	lower	energy,	lower	power,	poorer	life
circumstances,	poorer	relationships,	less	abundance,	less	love,	and	poorer
physical	and	emotional	health.	Because	of	the	low	energy,	such	needy	people
drain	us	on	all	levels.	They	tend	to	be	avoided	and	find	themselves	surrounded
by	people	on	the	same	level	(e.g.,	in	jail).

As	we	let	go	of	negative	feelings,	there	is	a	progressive	movement	up	the
scale	to	Courage	and	then	beyond,	with	increasing	effectiveness,	success,	and
more	effortless	abundance.	We	tend	to	seek	out	such	people.	We	say	they	are
“high.”	They	give	off	life	energy	to	all	living	things	around	them.	Animals	are
attracted	to	them.	They	have	a	green	thumb	and	positively	influence	the	lives	of
all	with	whom	they	come	in	contact.	At	the	level	of	Courage,	the	negative
feelings	have	not	all	disappeared,	but	now	we	have	sufficient	energy	to	handle
them	because	we’ve	re-owned	our	power	and	self-adequacy.	The	fastest	way	to
move	from	the	bottom	to	the	top	is	by	telling	the	truth	to	ourselves	and	to	others.
The	energy	levels	are	also	traditionally	associated	with	the	body	energy
centers	that	are	sometimes	referred	to	as	“chakras.”	The	chakras	are	energy
centers	through	which	“kundalini	energy”	is	said	to	flow,	once	it	is	awakened	at
the	level	of	Courage	(200).	The	energy	centers	(chakras)	can	be	measured	by	a
variety	of	clinical	techniques	and	sensitive	electronic	instruments.	On	the	Map	of
Consciousness,	the	chakras	calibrate	as	follows:	Crown	(600),	Third	Eye	(525),
Throat	(350),	Heart	(505),	Solar	Plexus	(275),	Sacral	or	Spleen	(275),	Base	or
Root	Chakra	(200).	When	we	relinquish	negative	feelings,	the	energy	in	our
higher	chakras	increases.	For	instance,	instead	of	habitually	“venting	our	spleen”
(second	chakra),	we	are	now	described	as	“all	heart”	(fifth	chakra).

This	energy	system	has	a	direct	impact	on	the	physical	body.	The	energy	in
each	chakra	flows	out	through	channels	called	“meridians”	to	the	whole	energy
body,	which	is	like	a	blueprint	to	the	physical	body.	Each	meridian	is	associated
with	a	particular	organ,	and	each	organ	is	associated	with	a	particular	emotion.	A

negative	emotion	throws	off	the	energy	balance	of	its	associated	acupuncture
meridian	and	related	organ.	For	instance,	depression,	despair,	and	melancholy
are	associated	with	the	liver	meridian,	so	these	emotions	tend	to	interfere	with
liver	function.	Every	negative	feeling	impairs	a	body	organ	and,	as	the	years	go
by,	that	organ	becomes	diseased	and	eventually	fails	to	function.

The	lower	our	emotional	state,	the	more	negatively	we	influence	not	only
our	own	lives	but	also	all	of	life	around	us.	The	higher	the	emotional	level	of
evolution,	the	more	positive	our	life	becomes	on	all	levels,	and	we	support	all
life	around	us.	As	negative	emotions	are	acknowledged	and	surrendered,	we	get
freer	and	move	up	the	scale,	eventually	experiencing	predominantly	positive
feelings.

All	lower	emotions	are	limitations	and	blind	us	to	the	reality	of	our	true

Self.	As	we	surrender	our	way	up	the	scale	and	near	the	top,	a	new	type	of
experience	begins	to	happen.	At	the	very	top	of	the	scale,	there	occurs	the
realization	of	one’s	true	Self	and	the	varying	levels	of	Illumination.	The	main
importance	of	this	is	to	note	that,	as	we	get	higher	and	freer,	what	the	world	calls
spiritual	awareness,	intuition,	and	growth	of	consciousness	occur.	This	is	the
common	experience	of	all	who	surrender	their	negative	feelings.	They	become
more	and	more	conscious.	That	which	is	impossible	to	see	or	experience	at	lower
levels	of	consciousness	becomes	self-evident	and	stunningly	obvious	at	higher
levels.

Understanding	Emotions
According	to	scientific	findings,	all	thoughts	are	filed	in	the	mind’s	memory
bank	under	a	filing	system	based	upon	the	associated	feeling	and	its	finer
gradations	(Gray–LaViolette,	1982).	They	are	filed	according	to	feeling	tone,	not
fact.	Consequently,	there	is	a	scientific	basis	for	the	observation	that	self-
awareness	is	increased	much	more	rapidly	by	observing	feelings	rather	than
thoughts.	The	thoughts	associated	with	even	one	feeling	may	literally	run	into
the	thousands.	The	understanding	of	the	underlying	emotion	and	its	correct
handling	is,	therefore,	more	rewarding	and	less	time-consuming	than	dealing
with	one’s	thoughts.

In	the	beginning,	if	one	is	unfamiliar	with	the	whole	subject	of	feelings,	it	is

often	advisable	to	begin	merely	by	observing	them	without	any	intention	of
doing	anything	about	them.	In	this	way,	some	clarification	will	occur	about	the
relationship	between	feelings	and	thoughts.	After	there	is	more	familiarity,	some
experimentation	can	then	occur.	For	instance,	certain	areas	of	thoughts	that	tend
to	recur	can	be	set	aside	and	the	feeling	associated	with	them	identified.	The
feeling	can	then	be	worked	with	by	first	accepting	that	it	is	there,	without

resisting	it	or	condemning	it.	And	then	one	begins	to	empty	out	the	energy	of	the
feeling	directly	by	letting	it	be	what	it	is	until	it	runs	out.	Somewhat	later,	the
former	thoughts	can	now	be	looked	at	and	their	character	will	be	observed	to
have	changed.	If	the	feeling	has	been	totally	surrendered	and	let	go,	usually	all
thoughts	associated	with	it	will	have	disappeared	entirely	and	been	replaced	by	a
concluding	thought	which	handles	the	matter	quickly.

For	example,	there	was	the	case	of	a	man	who	misplaced	his	passport
shortly	before	going	to	a	foreign	country.	As	the	scheduled	date	of	departure
drew	closer	and	closer,	his	inner	panic	mounted.	His	mind	raced	wildly,	trying	to
think	where	the	passport	could	have	been	misplaced.	He	searched	high	and	low.
He	tried	various	mental	tricks	to	no	avail.	He	berated	himself:	“How	could	I
have	been	so	stupid	as	to	lose	a	passport?	Now	there	isn’t	time	to	get	another
one!”	As	the	fateful	day	approached,	he	faced	a	real	dilemma:	no	passport,	no
trip.	Missing	the	trip	had	a	lot	of	negative	consequences	because	it	was	both
business	and	pleasure,	and	it	would	have	created	a	difficult	situation.	Finally,	he
remembered	to	do	the	letting	go	technique.

He	sat	down	and	asked	himself:	“What	is	the	basic	feeling	that	I’ve	been
ignoring?”	To	his	surprise,	the	basic	feeling	that	came	up	was	grief.	The	grief
was	associated	with	not	wanting	to	be	separated	from	someone	he	dearly	loved.
There	was	also	an	associated	fear	of	loss	of	the	relationship,	or	at	least	the
weakening	of	it	due	to	his	absence.	As	he	let	go	of	the	grief	and	the	associated
fear,	he	suddenly	felt	at	peace	about	the	matter.	He	also	concluded	that	if	the
relationship	couldn’t	handle	a	two-week	absence,	it	wasn’t	worth	all	that	much
anyway;	so,	there	was	really	nothing	at	risk.	As	soon	as	he	felt	at	peace,	he
instantly	remembered	where	the	passport	was.	In	fact,	it	was	in	a	place	so	simple
and	obvious	that	only	unconscious	blocking	could	explain	why	he	had	not
remembered	it.	Needless	to	say,	all	of	the	thousands	of	thoughts	about	the
missing	passport,	the	failed	trip	and	the	potential	consequences	instantly
disappeared.	His	emotional	state	became	one	of	gratitude	and	happiness	instead
of	frustration.

Letting	go	can	be	very	useful	in	everyday	life	situations,	but	its	use	in	life

crises	can	be	crucial	in	preventing	and	alleviating	large	amounts	of	suffering.	In
a	life	crisis	there	is	usually	an	overwhelm	of	emotion.	The	crisis	has	tapped	into
one	of	our	major	areas	of	suppressed	or	repressed	feelings.	In	this	situation	the
problem	is	not	one	of	identifying	the	emotion	but	how	to	handle	the	overwhelm.

Handling	Emotional	Crises
Because	this	is	a	very	difficult	problem	for	most	people,	some	details	are
needed.	There	are	several	techniques	to	help	move	through	emotional	disaster

much	more	quickly,	and	with	a	better	end	result,	than	allowing	it	to	run	out	on	its
own.	Recall	the	usual	mechanisms	that	the	mind	consciously	uses	to	handle
emotions,	which	are	suppression	(or	repression),	expression,	and	escape.	These
are	deleterious	only	when	they	are	used	without	conscious	intent.	In	an
overwhelm,	it	is	often	advisable	to	utilize	them,	but	doing	so	consciously.	The
purpose	of	this	maneuver	is	to	reduce	the	sheer	overwhelming	quantity	of	the
emotion	itself	so	that	it	can	be	disassembled	and	let	go	of	in	bits	and	pieces	(this
process	is	described	below).	Thus,	in	this	case,	it	is	all	right	consciously	to	push
away	as	much	of	the	emotion	as	we	are	capable	of	at	the	moment.	The	emotion
can	be	reduced	in	intensity	by	sharing	the	feeling	with	close	friends	or	mentors.
By	merely	expressing	the	feeling,	some	of	the	energy	behind	it	is	reduced.	It	is
also	alright	in	this	circumstance	consciously	to	utilize	escape	mechanisms,	such
as	going	out	in	a	social	situation	to	get	some	distance	from	the	upset,	playing
with	the	dog,	watching	television,	going	to	the	movies,	playing	music,	making
love,	or	whatever	one’s	habit	is	under	the	circumstances.	When	the	feeling	has
been	reduced	in	its	sheer	quantity	and	intensity,	it	is	best	to	start	letting	go	of
small	aspects	of	the	situation	rather	than	the	overall	situation	and	the
accompanying	emotion	itself.

To	illustrate	this	point,	let’s	take	the	example	of	a	man	who	loses	his	job
after	many	years	with	a	company,	and	is	now	in	an	overwhelm	of	despair.	By
utilizing	the	three	mechanisms	already	described,	some	of	the	emotion	can	be
reduced.	What	he	can	look	at,	then,	are	some	of	the	small	trivia	about	the	job.
For	instance,	could	he	let	go	of	wanting	to	have	lunch	where	he	always	had
lunch	with	his	business	colleagues?	Could	he	let	go	of	wanting	to	park	his	car	in
the	parking	space	he	always	had	in	the	past?	Could	he	let	go	of	wanting	to	ride
up	in	the	same	elevator?	Could	he	let	go	of	the	attachment	to	his	desk?	Could	he
let	go	of	the	attachment	to	the	secretary	and	her	friendliness	toward	him?	Could
he	let	go	of	the	attachment	to	his	computer?	Could	he	let	go	of	seeing	the	same
boss	every	day?	Could	he	let	go	of	his	feeling	of	familiarity	with	the	background
noises	in	the	office?

The	purpose	of	surrendering	these	smaller	aspects	of	losing	a	job,	which
may	seem	trivial,	is	that	it	gets	the	mind	into	the	letting	go	mode.	The	letting	go
mode	takes	us	up	to	the	level	of	Courage;	the	negative	feelings	have	been
acknowledged	and	worked	through;	consequently,	they’ve	lost	their	charge.
Suddenly	there	is	the	awareness	that	we	have	the	courage	to	face	the	situation,
recognize	our	feelings,	and	do	something	about	them.	As	the	trivia	are
surrendered,	curiously,	the	main	event	becomes	less	and	less	oppressive.	The
reason	for	the	phenomenon	is	that,	when	we	use	the	mechanism	of	surrender	on
one	emotion,	we	are	surrendering	on	all	emotions	at	the	same	time.	It	is	as

though	all	emotions	have	the	same	underlying	energy,	so	that	to	surrender	in	one
direction	surrenders	feelings	which	appear,	on	the	surface,	to	be	in	an	opposite
direction.	This	is	a	matter	of	clinical	experience;	it	must	be	tried	personally	in
order	to	believe	it.

After	utilizing	the	above	four	methods	(suppression,	expression,	escape,

surrender	of	smaller	aspects),	a	fifth	now	becomes	apparent.	Every	strong
emotion	is	really	a	composite	of	a	number	of	subsidiary	emotions	and	the	total
emotional	complex	can	be	disassembled.	Thus,	for	instance,	the	man	who	has
lost	his	job	initially	has	an	overwhelming	feeling	of	despair;	but,	as	he	begins	to
surrender	around	the	periphery,	and	as	he	diminishes	his	overwhelm	through
consciously	utilizing	escape,	suppression,	and	expression,	he	now	realizes	that
there	is	also	anger.	He	sees	that	the	anger	is	associated	with	pride.	There	is	a	lot
of	anger	in	the	form	of	resentment.	There	is	self-invalidation,	which	is	a	form	of
anger	expressed	against	himself.	There	is	also	considerable	fear.	Thus	these
associated	emotions	can	now	be	addressed	directly.	For	instance,	he	can	start
letting	go	of	the	fear	that	he	won’t	find	another	job.	When	that	fear	is
acknowledged	and	let	go,	all	the	alternate	possibilities	that	exist	will	become
suddenly	apparent	to	him.	And,	as	he	surrenders	pride,	he	will	quickly	see	that
he	is	not	faced	with	economic	disaster,	as	he	had	thought.	Thus,	as	the
disassembled	emotional	complex	is	taken	apart	into	its	component	parts,	each
component	part	now	has	less	energy	and	can	be	surrendered	individually.

As	we	come	out	of	the	overwhelm,	it	will	be	remembered	that	a	certain
portion	of	the	emotion	was	purposely	suppressed	or	escaped.	It	can	now	be
reexamined,	so	that	it	no	longer	does	residual	harm,	such	as	ending	up	in
bitterness,	unconscious	guilt,	or	lower	self-esteem.	Fragments	of	the	emotional
complex	may	recur	for	a	period	of	time,	even	years;	however,	because	they	are
now	small	fragments,	each	can	be	handled	as	it	arises.	At	least	the	crisis	situation
will	have	been	passed	through	safely	and	consciously.

Handling	a	crisis	from	the	emotional	rather	than	the	intellectual	level	will

shorten	its	duration	dramatically.	In	the	case	of	someone	who	loses	a	job,
handling	it	from	the	intellectual	level	will	produce	thousands	of	thoughts	and
hypothetical	scenarios.	The	person	suffers	through	many	sleepless	nights	due	to
the	racing	thoughts	about	the	situation	as	the	mind	reviews	it	over	and	over
again.	All	of	this	is	fruitless.	Until	the	underlying	emotion	is	surrendered,	the
thoughts	will	be	engendered	endlessly.	We	all	know	of	people	who	have	had	an
emotional	crisis	many	years	ago	and,	to	this	day,	have	not	recovered.	It	has
totally	colored	their	life,	and	they	have	paid	a	big	price	for	their	lack	of	know-
how	in	handling	the	underlying	emotions.

There	are	numerous	benefits	to	handling	a	life	crisis	successfully.	For	one

thing,	the	amount	of	suppressed	or	repressed	emotion	is	now	much	less.	The
crisis	has	forced	it	up	to	be	relinquished	and,	therefore,	the	amount	that	is	left	in
the	reservoir	is	much	less.	There	is	a	greater	feeling	of	self-esteem	and
confidence	because	there	is	the	awareness	that	one	can	survive	and	handle
whatever	life	will	bring.	There	is	an	overall	reduction	of	the	fear	of	life,	a	greater
feeling	of	mastery,	greater	compassion	for	the	suffering	of	others,	and	an
increased	ability	to	help	them	through	similar	circumstances.	Paradoxically,	after
a	life	crisis,	there	often	is	a	period	of	variable	duration	of	peace	and	calmness,
sometimes	approaching	the	level	of	mystical	experience.	The	“dark	night	of	the
soul”	frequently	precedes	states	of	heightened	awareness.

One	of	the	best-known	examples	of	this	paradox	is	illustrated	by	persons
who	have	had	near-death	experiences.	There	are	now	many	books	on	the	subject
that	reveal	a	certain	commonality.	Once	the	worst	of	all	possible	fears—the
dread	and	shock	of	death—has	been	faced,	it	is	superseded	by	a	profound	sense
of	serenity,	peace,	oneness,	and	immunity	from	fear.	Many	such	persons	develop
extraordinary	abilities,	become	healers,	develop	psychic	awareness,	and
advanced	states	of	spiritual	illumination.	They	experience	major	leaps	in	growth
and	the	sudden	appearance	of	new	talents	and	capacities.	Thus,	every	life	crisis
carries	within	it	the	kernels	of	a	reversal,	a	renewal,	an	expansion,	a	leap	in
consciousness,	and	a	letting	go	of	the	old	and	a	birth	of	the	new.

Healing	the	Past
When	we	look	at	our	lives,	we	will	see	the	residual	of	past	life	crises	which	are
still	unresolved.	Thoughts	and	feelings	about	the	events	tend	to	occur	and	color
our	perception,	and	we	will	note	that	they	have	disabled	us	in	certain	areas	of
life.	At	that	point,	it	is	wise	to	ask	ourselves	if	it	is	worth	paying	the	continuing
cost.	Now	that	we	have	some	mechanisms	by	which	to	handle	these	residuals,
they	can	be	uncovered.	The	residual	feelings	can	be	investigated	and	let	go	of	so
that	a	healing	can	take	place.	This	brings	us	to	another	emotional	healing
technique	that	becomes	powerful	once	the	major	event	has	passed.	That	is	to
place	the	event	in	a	different	context,	to	see	it	from	a	different	perspective,	and
to	hold	it	in	a	different	paradigm	with	a	different	significance	and	meaning.

It	is	said	that	most	people	spend	their	lives	regretting	the	past	and	fearing
the	future;	therefore,	they	are	unable	to	experience	joy	in	the	present.	Many	of	us
have	assumed	that	this	is	our	human	fate,	our	lot,	and	the	best	that	we	can	do	is
“grin	and	bear	it.”	Philosophers	have	sometimes	made	hay	out	of	this
negativistic,	pessimistic	approach	and	developed	whole	systems	of	nihilism.
These	philosophers,	some	of	whom	have	become	celebrated	over	the	years,	are
obviously	mere	victims	of	painful	emotions	that	they	did	not	handle	and	which

triggered	endless	intellectualization	and	elaboration.	Some	spent	their	entire
lifetime	constructing	sophisticated	intellectual	systems	to	justify	what	is
glaringly	obvious	as	a	simple	suppressed	emotion.

One	of	the	most	effective	tools	for	handling	the	past	is	the	creation	of	a
different	context.	What	this	means	is	that	we	give	it	a	different	meaning.	We
take	on	a	different	attitude	about	the	past	difficulty	or	trauma,	and	we
acknowledge	the	hidden	gift	in	it.	The	value	of	this	technique	was	first
recognized	in	psychiatry	by	Viktor	Frankl.	He	explained	the	approach—which
he	called	“Logotherapy”—in	his	famous	book,	Man’s	Search	for	Meaning.	His
clinical	and	personal	experience	demonstrated	that	emotional	events	and
traumatic	occurrences	will	change	considerably	and	be	healed	if	a	new	meaning
is	placed	around	them.	Frankl	told	of	his	own	experience	in	the	Nazi
concentration	camps	wherein	he	came	to	see	his	physical	and	psychic	suffering
as	an	opportunity	to	achieve	inner	triumph.	“Everything	can	be	taken	from	a	man
but	one	thing:	the	last	of	the	human	freedoms—to	choose	one’s	attitude	in	any
given	set	of	circumstances,	to	choose	one’s	own	way”	(Frankl,	[1959]	2006).
Frankl	re-contextualized	the	horrific	circumstances	to	hold	profound	meaning
for	the	human	spirit.

Every	life	experience,	no	matter	how	“tragic,”	contains	a	hidden	lesson.
When	we	discover	and	acknowledge	the	hidden	gift	that	is	there,	a	healing	takes
place.	In	the	example	of	the	man	who	lost	his	job,	after	some	time	had	passed,	he
looked	back	and	saw	that	his	former	job	was	stunting,	that	he	had	been	in	a	rut.
Frankly,	the	job	had	given	him	an	ulcer.	Prior	to	losing	the	job,	he	had	seen	only
the	pleasures	from	it.	Once	outside	of	the	situation,	he	began	to	see	the	costs	that
he	had	been	paying—physically,	mentally,	and	emotionally.	After	losing	the	job,
he	was	open	to	discovering	new	abilities	and	new	talents;	in	fact,	he	began	a
new,	more	promising	career.

So,	life	events	are	opportunities	to	grow,	expand,	experience,	and	develop.

In	some	cases,	it	seems	in	retrospect	that	there	was	actually	this	unconscious
purpose	behind	the	event,	as	though	our	unconscious	knew	that	something
important	had	to	be	learned	and,	painful	as	it	was,	it	was	the	only	way	it	could	be
brought	into	experience.	This	is	part	of	the	psychology	of	the	psychoanalyst	Carl
Jung,	who	concluded	after	a	lifetime	of	study,	that	there	is	an	inborn	drive	in	the
unconscious	toward	wholeness,	completeness,	and	realization	of	the	Self,	and
that	the	unconscious	will	devise	the	ways	and	means	of	bringing	this	about,	even
if	they	are	traumatic	to	the	conscious	mind.

Jung	also	said	that	in	the	unconscious	there	was	an	aspect	of	ourselves
called	the	“shadow.”	The	shadow	is	all	the	repressed	thoughts,	feelings	and
concepts	about	ourselves	that	we	do	not	want	to	face.	One	benefit	of	a	crisis	is

that	it	often	brings	us	into	familiarity	with	our	shadow.	It	makes	us	more	human
and	more	whole	to	realize	what	we	share	with	all	of	humanity.	All	the	stuff	that
we	thought	“they”	were	guilty	of	is	equally	in	ourselves.	Thus,	when	it	is
brought	up	to	conscious	awareness,	acknowledged,	and	surrendered,	it	no	longer
unconsciously	runs	us.	Once	the	shadow	has	been	acknowledged,	it	loses	its
power.	All	that	is	necessary	is	merely	to	recognize	that	we	have	certain
forbidden	impulses,	thoughts,	and	feelings.	Now,	they	can	be	handled	with	a	“So
what?”

Passing	through	a	life	crisis,	then,	makes	us	more	human,	more

compassionate,	more	accepting	and	understanding	of	ourselves	and	others.	We
no	longer	have	to	indulge	in	making	others	wrong	or	making	ourselves	wrong.
Handling	an	emotional	crisis	leads	to	greater	wisdom	and	results	in	lifetime
benefits.	Fear	of	life	is	really	the	fear	of	emotions.	It	is	not	the	facts	that	we	fear
but	our	feelings	about	them.	Once	we	have	mastery	over	our	feelings,	our	fear	of
life	diminishes.	We	feel	a	greater	self-confidence,	and	we	are	willing	to	take
greater	chances	because	we	now	feel	that	we	can	handle	the	emotional
consequences,	whatever	they	might	be.	Because	fear	is	the	basis	of	all
inhibitions,	mastery	over	fear	means	the	unblocking	of	whole	avenues	of	life
experience	that	previously	had	been	avoided.

Thus,	the	man	who	successfully	handles	the	crisis	of	losing	a	job	will	never
again	experience	that	same	fear.	He	will,	therefore,	be	more	creative	on	the	next
job,	willing	to	take	the	necessary	risks	to	make	it	a	success.	He	begins	to	see
how	that	haunting	fear	of	job	loss	had	severely	limited	his	performance	in	the
past,	made	him	fearful	and	cautious,	and	cost	him	his	self-esteem	due	to	his
kowtowing	and	compliance	with	his	superiors.

One	benefit	from	a	life	crisis	is	greater	self-awareness.	The	situation	is
overwhelming,	and	we	are	forced	to	stop	all	of	our	diversionary	games,	take	a
good	look	at	our	life	situation,	and	re-evaluate	our	beliefs,	goals,	values,	and	life
direction.	It	is	an	opportunity	to	re-evaluate	and	let	go	of	guilt.	It	is	also	an
opportunity	for	a	total	shift	in	attitude.	Life	crises,	as	we	pass	through	them,
confront	us	with	polar	opposites.	Shall	we	hate	or	forgive	that	person?	Shall	we
learn	from	this	experience	and	grow,	or	resent	it	and	become	bitter?	Do	we
choose	to	overlook	the	other	person’s	shortcomings	and	our	own,	or	instead	do
we	resent	and	mentally	attack	them?	Shall	we	withdraw	from	a	similar	situation
in	the	future	with	greater	fear,	or	shall	we	transcend	this	crisis	and	master	it	once
and	for	all?	Do	we	choose	hope	or	discouragement?	Can	we	use	the	experience
as	an	opportunity	to	learn	how	to	share,	or	shall	we	withdraw	into	a	shell	of	fear
and	bitterness?	Every	emotional	experience	is	an	opportunity	to	go	up	or	down.
Which	do	we	choose?	That	is	the	confrontation.

We	have	the	opportunity	to	choose	whether	we	want	to	hang	on	or	let	go	of
emotional	upsets.	We	can	look	at	the	cost	of	hanging	on	to	them.	Do	we	want	to
pay	the	price?	Are	we	willing	to	accept	the	feelings?	We	can	look	at	the	benefits
of	letting	go	of	them.	The	choice	we	make	will	determine	our	future.	What	kind
of	a	future	do	we	want?	Will	we	choose	to	be	healed,	or	will	we	become	one	of
the	walking	wounded?

In	making	this	choice,	it	is	well	to	look	at	the	payoff	we	get	from	hanging

on	to	the	residuals	of	a	painful	experience.	What	are	the	satisfactions	we	are
getting?	How	little	are	we	willing	to	settle	for?	Anger.	Hatred.	Self-pity.
Resentments.	They	all	have	their	cheap	little	payoff,	that	little	inner	satisfaction.
Let’s	not	pretend	that	it’s	not	there.	There	is	a	weird,	quirky	pleasure	when	we
hang	on	to	pain.	It	certainly	satisfies	our	unconscious	need	for	the	alleviation	of
guilt	through	punishment.	We	get	to	feel	miserable	and	rotten.	The	question	then
arises,	“But	for	how	long?”

Take,	for	example,	a	man	who	had	not	spoken	to	his	brother	for	twenty-
three	years.	Neither	of	them	could	remember	what	the	incident	was	about;	it	had
been	long	forgotten.	But	they	were	in	the	habit	of	not	speaking,	and	so	for
twenty-three	years	they	paid	the	price	of	missing	each	other’s	company,
affection,	togetherness	in	family	matters,	and	all	the	shared	experiences	and	love
they	could	have	had.	When	the	man	learned	about	the	mechanism	of	surrender,
he	began	to	let	go	of	his	feelings	about	his	brother.	Suddenly,	he	broke	out	in
tears	of	grief,	realizing	all	that	had	been	lost	over	the	years.	By	forgiving	his
brother,	he	triggered	a	similar	response	in	the	brother,	and	the	two	were	reunited.
Then,	one	of	the	brothers	flashed	back	on	the	incident.	It	had	been	an	argument
over	a	pair	of	tennis	shoes.	Over	one	pair	of	tennis	shoes	they	had	paid	a	price
extending	over	twenty-three	years!	Had	the	man	not	learned	the	technique	of
letting	go,	he	might	well	have	gone	to	his	grave	with	the	same	resentment.	So
the	question	is,	“How	long	do	we	want	to	go	on	suffering?	When	are	we	willing
to	give	it	up?	When	is	enough	enough?”

The	part	of	us	that	wants	to	cling	to	negative	emotions	is	our	smallness.	It	is

the	part	of	us	that	is	mean,	petty,	selfish,	competitive,	cheap,	conniving,
mistrusting,	vindictive,	judgmental,	diminished,	weak,	guilty,	ashamed,	and
vain.	It	has	little	energy;	it	is	depleting,	demeaning,	and	leads	to	the	lowering	of
self-respect.	It	is	the	small	part	of	us	that	accounts	for	our	own	self-hatred,
unending	guilt,	and	seeking	for	punishment,	sickness,	and	disease.	Is	that	the
part	with	which	we	want	to	identify?	Is	that	the	part	we	want	to	energize?	Is	that
the	way	we	want	to	see	ourselves?	Because	if	that’s	the	way	we	see	ourselves,
that’s	the	way	others	will	see	us.

The	world	can	only	see	us	as	we	see	ourselves.	Are	we	willing	to	pay	those

consequences?	If	we	see	ourselves	as	cheap	and	petty,	it’s	unlikely	that	we’ll	be
at	the	top	of	the	company	list	for	a	raise.

The	price	of	holding	on	to	smallness	can	be	demonstrated	with	muscle
testing.	The	procedure	is	fairly	simple	(Hawkins,	[1995],	2012).	Hold	in	mind	a
mean,	petty	thought	and	have	someone	press	down	on	your	arm	while	you	resist;
notice	the	effect.	Now	choose	the	exact	opposite	view.	Picture	yourself	as	being
generous,	forgiving,	loving,	and	experiencing	your	inner	greatness.	Instantly,
there	will	be	an	enormous	increase	in	muscle	strength	indicating	a	surge	of
positive	bio-energy.	Smallness	brings	weakness,	sickness,	disease,	and	death.	Do
you	really	want	that?	Letting	go	of	negative	feelings	can	be	accompanied	by
another	very	healthy	maneuver	which	will	greatly	assist	your	inner
transformation,	and	that	is	to	stop	resisting	the	positive	emotions.

Enhancing	Positive	Emotions
The	corollary	to	letting	go	of	negative	feelings	is	to	stop	resisting	the	positive
ones.	Everything	in	the	universe	has	its	opposite;	therefore,	in	the	mind,	every
negative	feeling	has	its	counterpart	between	smallness	and	greatness,	whether
we	are	constantly	aware	of	its	existence	at	any	given	moment	or	not.

A	good	and	very	illuminating	exercise	is	to	sit	down	and	look	at	the	feeling

that	is	directly	opposite	the	negative	one	that	we	are	experiencing	and	begin	to
let	go	resisting	it.	Let’s	say,	for	instance,	that	a	friend’s	birthday	is	coming	up
and	we	are	feeling	resentful	and	stingy;	therefore,	we	just	can’t	seem	to	get	out
to	shop	for	a	present,	and	the	day	is	getting	closer.	The	exact	opposite	feelings
are	those	of	forgiveness	and	generosity.	We	just	start	looking	for	the	feeling	of
forgiveness	within	ourselves	and	stop	resisting	it.	As	we	keep	letting	go	of	our
resistance	to	being	a	forgiving	person,	it	is	often	surprising	that	it	will	come	up
with	a	surge.	We	will	begin	to	recognize	that	part	of	our	nature	has	always	been
willing	and	wanting	to	forgive,	but	we	didn’t	dare	chance	it.	We	thought	we
might	appear	foolish.	We	thought	we	were	punishing	the	other	person	by
holding	the	resentment,	but	we	have	actually	been	suppressing	love.	In	the
beginning,	we	may	not	consciously	feel	this	specifically	about	our	friend,	but	we
will	begin	to	notice	that	we	do	have	this	aspect	to	our	personality.	As	we	keep
surrendering	our	resistance	to	love,	we	will	notice	that	within	ourselves	there	is
something	that	wants	to	express	itself	through	sharing	and	giving,	letting	the	past
go	and	burying	the	hatchet.	There	is	a	desire	to	make	a	friendly	gesture;	we	want
to	heal	the	separation,	to	repair	the	wound,	to	make	good	the	wrong,	to	express
gratitude,	and	to	take	a	chance	on	being	thought	a	fool.

The	purpose	of	this	exercise	is	to	locate	within	ourselves	that	which	can
only	be	described	as	greatness.	Greatness	is	the	courage	to	overcome	obstacles.

It	is	the	willingness	to	move	to	a	higher	level	of	love.	It	is	the	acceptance	of
others’	humanness	and	having	compassion	for	their	suffering	by	putting
ourselves	in	their	shoes.	Out	of	the	forgiveness	of	others	come	self-forgiveness
and	the	relief	of	guilt.	The	real	payoff	we	get	is	when	we	let	go	of	our	negativity
and	choose	to	be	loving;	we	are	the	ones	who	benefit.	We	are	the	ones	who	gain
from	the	real	payoff.	With	this	increased	awareness	of	who	we	really	are	comes
the	progressive	invulnerability	to	pain.	Once	we	compassionately	accept	our
own	humanness	and	that	of	others,	we	are	no	longer	subject	to	humiliation,	for
true	humility	is	a	part	of	greatness.

Out	of	the	recognition	of	who	we	really	are	comes	the	desire	to	seek	that
which	is	uplifting.	Out	of	it	arises	a	new	meaning	and	context	for	life.	When	that
inner	emptiness,	due	to	lack	of	self-worth,	is	replaced	by	true	self-love,	self-
respect	and	esteem,	we	no	longer	have	to	seek	it	in	the	world,	for	that	source	of
happiness	is	within	ourselves.	It	dawns	on	us	that	it	cannot	be	supplied	by	the
world	anyway.	No	amount	of	riches	can	compensate	for	an	inner	feeling	of
poverty.	We	all	know	of	the	many	multimillionaires	who	try	to	compensate	for
their	inner	sense	of	hollowness	and	lack	of	inner	worth.	Once	we	have	contacted
this	inner	Self,	this	inner	greatness,	this	inner	completion,	contentment,	and	true
sense	of	happiness,	we	have	transcended	the	world.	The	world	is	now	a	place	to
enjoy,	and	we	are	no	longer	run	by	it.	We	are	no	longer	at	the	effect	of	it.

When	we	utilize	these	techniques	of	relinquishing	the	negative	and
surrendering	resistance	to	the	positive,	sooner	or	later	we	come	into	a	sudden,
comprehensive	awareness	of	our	true	dimension.	Once	this	has	been
experienced,	it	will	never	be	forgotten.	The	world	will	never	intimidate	us	again
as	it	once	did.	There	may	be	continued	compliance	with	the	ways	of	the	world
out	of	sheer	habit,	but	the	inner	drivenness,	the	inner	vulnerability,	and	the	inner
doubt	is	now	gone.	Outwardly,	the	behavior	may	appear	the	same	but,	inwardly,
the	causes	for	it	are	now	totally	different.	The	end	result	of	the	conscious
handling	of	emotions	is	invulnerability	and	imperturbability.	Our	inner	nature	is
now	bullet	proof.	We	are	able	to	go	through	life	with	balance	and	grace.

CHAPTER

4

APATHY	AND	DEPRESSION

Apathy	is	the	belief,	“I	can’t.”	It	is	the	feeling	that	we	cannot	do	anything	about
our	situation	and	no	one	else	can	help.	It	is	hopelessness	and	helplessness.	It	is
associated	with	such	thoughts	as:	“Who	cares?”;	“What’s	the	use?”;	“It’s
boring”;	“Why	bother?”;	“I	can’t	win	anyway.”	This	is	the	role	exhibited	by
Eeyore,	the	glum	character	in	“Winnie	the	Pooh”	cartoons	who	says:	“Oh	well.
Won’t	do	any	good	anyway.”	Discouragement.	Defeat.	Impossible.	Too	hard.
All	alone.	Give	up.	Isolated.	Estranged.	Withdrawn.	Cut	off.	Desolate.
Depressed.	Depleted.	Unfulfilling.	Pessimistic.	Careless.	Humorless.
Meaningless.	Absurd.	Pointless.	Helpless.	Failure.	Too	tired.	Despair.	Confused.
Forgetful.	Fatalistic.	Too	late.	Too	old.	Too	young.	Mechanical.	Doomed.
Negative.	Forlorn.	Useless.	Lost.	Senseless.	Bleak.	Blasé.

The	biologic	purpose	of	apathy	is	to	summon	aid,	but	part	of	the	feeling	is

that	no	help	is	possible.	Much	of	the	world’s	population	is	functioning	on	the
level	of	apathy.	For	them,	there	is	no	hope	that	they	will	be	able	to	meet	their
basic	needs,	nor	will	help	be	forthcoming	from	elsewhere.

The	average	person	is	often	apathetic	in	a	number	of	areas	in	life,	but	only
periodically	faces	overwhelming	apathy	about	their	whole	life	situation.	Apathy
indicates	a	lack	of	life	energy	and	is	close	to	death.	This	was	observed	during	the
World	War	II	blitz	of	London.	Infants	were	removed	to	nurseries	and	remote
safe	sections	of	England	where	their	physical,	nutritional,	and	medical	needs
were	well	attended.	However,	the	infants	developed	apathy	and	began	to	fail;
they	lost	their	appetites	and	the	death	rate	was	high.	It	was	discovered	that
apathy	resulted	from	a	lack	of	nurturing	and	emotional	closeness	to	a	mothering

	
figure.	It	was	an	emotional	state	and	not	a	physical	one.	Without	love	and
affection,	they	lost	the	will	to	live.

In	our	country,	we	see	depressed	economic	areas	where	an	entire	local

population	goes	into	apathy.	When	people	from	such	areas	appear	on	the
television	news,	it	is	often	with	such	comments	as,	“When	the	welfare	check
runs	out,	I	guess	we	just	face	starvation;	there’s	no	hope	for	us.”

Feelings	of	apathy	about	the	letting	go	technique	itself	may	appear	as
resistances.	These	may	take	the	form	of	attitudes	and	thoughts	such	as:	“It	won’t
work	anyway”;	“What’s	the	difference?”;	“I’m	not	ready	for	this	yet”;	“I	can’t
feel”;	“I’m	too	busy”;	“I’m	tired	of	letting	go”;	“I’m	too	overwhelmed”;	“I
forgot”;	“I’m	too	depressed”;	“I’m	too	sleepy.”	The	way	out	of	apathy	is	to
remind	ourselves	of	our	intention,	which	is	to	get	higher	and	freer,	to	become
more	effective	and	happy,	and	to	let	go	of	the	resistance	to	the	technique	itself.

“I	Can’t”	vs.	“I	Won’t”
Another	way	out	of	apathy	is	to	look	at	the	payoff	we	are	getting	out	of	the
apathetic	attitudes.	The	payoff	may	be	in	the	face-saving	excuses	to	cover	up
what	is	actually	fear.	Since	in	reality,	we	are	very	capable	beings,	most	“I
can’ts”	are	really	“I	won’ts.”	Behind	the	“I	can’ts”	or	the	“I	won’ts”	is
frequently	a	fear.	Then,	when	we	look	at	the	truth	of	what	is	behind	the	feeling,
we	have	already	moved	up	the	scale	from	apathy	to	fear.	Fear	is	a	higher	energy
state	than	apathy.	Fear	at	least	begins	to	motivate	us	into	action	and,	in	that
action,	we	can	again	surrender	fear	and	move	up	to	anger	or	pride	or	courage,	all
of	which	are	higher	states	than	apathy.

Let’s	take	a	typical	human	problem	and	trace	how	the	mechanism	of

surrender	works	to	free	us	from	an	inhibition.	Public	speaking	is	one	of	the	most
common	inhibitions.	On	the	level	of	apathy	in	this	arena,	we	say:	“Oh,	I	can’t
possibly	speak	in	public.	It	is	way	too	overwhelming.	Nobody	will	want	to	hear
me	anyway.	I	don’t	have	anything	worth	saying.”	If	we	remind	ourselves	of	our
intention,	we	will	see	that	the	apathy	is	merely	covering	up	fear.	Now,	the
thought	of	speaking	in	public	is	frightening,	not	hopeless.	This	brings	about	a
certain	clarity.	The	facts	are	not	that	we	“can’t,”	but	merely	that	we	are	“afraid.”
As	this	fear	comes	up	and	is	let	go,	we	become	aware	of	the	fact	that	we
have	a	desire	to	do	the	very	thing	that	we	fear.	Now	when	looking	at	the	desire,
which	is	blocked	by	fear	and	perhaps	compounded	by	some	grief	over	lost
opportunities	in	the	past,	anger	arises.	At	this	point,	we	have	already	moved
from	apathy,	to	grief,	to	desire,	and	up	to	anger.	In	anger	there	is	much	more
energy	and	capacity	for	action.	Anger	often	takes	the	form	of	resentment,	such
as	resentment	that	we	agreed	to	the	public	speaking	and	now	feel	obligated	to	do

it.

There	is	also	anger	about	our	fear,	which	has	blocked	accomplishment	in	the

past,	and	the	anger	leads	to	a	decision	to	do	something	about	it.	This	decision
might	take	the	form	of	a	public	speaking	course.	When	we	sign	up	for	a	public
speaking	course,	we	have	already	moved	up	to	the	energy	of	pride	in	that	we
have	finally	taken	the	bull	by	the	horns	and	are	doing	something	about	it.	On	the
way	to	the	speaking	course,	again	more	fear	will	arise.	As	this	is	constantly
acknowledged	and	surrendered,	we	become	aware	that	we	have	courage	in	our
capacity	at	least	to	face	our	fears	and	take	action	to	overcome	them.

The	level	of	courage	has	a	lot	of	energy.	That	energy	takes	the	form	of
letting	go	of	residual	fear,	anger,	and	desire,	so	that	in	the	middle	of	the	speaking
class,	we	suddenly	experience	acceptance.	With	acceptance	there	is	the	freedom
from	resistance,	which	had	taken	the	form	previously	of	fear,	apathy,	and	anger.
Now,	we	begin	to	experience	pleasure.	There	is	the	self-confidence	of
acceptance,	“I	can	do	it.”	On	the	level	of	acceptance,	there	is	greater	awareness
of	others,	so	that	in	the	speaking	class,	we	become	aware	of	the	pain,	suffering,
and	embarrassment	of	others	in	the	class	and	begin	to	be	concerned	about	them.
With	the	emergence	of	this	compassion	towards	others,	there	is	a	loss	of
self-consciousness.	With	the	emergence	of	selflessness	come	moments	of	peace.
On	the	way	home	from	the	class,	we	experience	an	inner	contentment,	a	feeling
that	we	have	grown,	that	we	have	shared	with	others.	In	the	experience	of
sharing,	we	have	forgotten	ourselves	for	a	few	moments	and	have	been	more
concerned	with	the	happiness	of	someone	else.	We	take	pleasure	in	the
accomplishments	of	others.	In	this	state,	there	is	a	transforming	grace,	the
discovery	of	our	inner	compassion,	a	feeling	of	connectedness	with	others,	and	a
compassion	for	their	suffering.	With	the	full	development	of	this	progression,	we
might	then	share	with	others	how	we	had	a	fear	of	public	speaking,	the	steps	we
took	to	overcome	it,	the	success	we	experienced,	the	increase	of	our	self-esteem,
and	the	positive	changes	in	our	relationships.

This	entire	progression	is	the	basis	of	a	great	deal	of	the	power	of	self-help
groups:	the	sharing	of	inner	experiences	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest	levels	on
the	scale	of	emotions.	That	which	in	the	beginning	seemed	formidable	and
overwhelming	has	now	been	surmounted	and	handled,	with	the	resultant
increase	of	aliveness	and	well-being.	This	increase	in	self-esteem	then	spills	over
into	other	areas	of	life,	and	the	increase	in	confidence	results	in	greater	material
abundance	and	capability	in	vocational	functioning.	On	this	level,	love	takes	the
form	of	sharing	and	encouraging	others,	and	our	activities	are	constructive
instead	of	destructive.	The	energy	radiated	out	is	then	positive	and	attractive	to
others,	resulting	in	a	constant	positive	feedback.

Once	we	have	experienced	this	progression	up	the	scale	of	emotions	in	any
one	particular	area,	we	now	begin	to	realize	that	it	can	be	done	in	other	areas	of
limitation	in	our	lives.	Behind	all	of	the	“I	can’ts”	are	merely	“I	won’ts.”	The	“I
won’ts”	mean	“I	am	afraid	to”	or	“I	am	ashamed	to”	or	“I	have	too	much	pride
to	try,	for	fear	I	might	fail.”	Behind	that	is	anger	at	ourselves	and	circumstances
engendered	by	pride.	Acknowledging	and	letting	go	of	these	feelings	brings	us
up	to	courage	and,	with	that,	finally	acceptance	and	an	inner	peacefulness,	at
least	as	it	regards	the	area	which	has	been	surmounted.

Apathy	and	depression	are	the	prices	we	pay	for	having	settled	for	and
bought	into	our	smallness.	It’s	what	we	get	for	having	played	the	victim	and
allowed	ourselves	to	be	programmed.	It’s	the	price	we	pay	for	having	bought
into	negativity.	It’s	what	results	from	resisting	the	part	of	ourselves	that	is
loving,	courageous,	and	great.	It	results	from	allowing	ourselves	to	be
invalidated	by	ourselves	or	others;	it	is	the	consequence	of	holding	ourselves	in	a
negative	context.	In	reality,	it	is	only	a	definition	of	ourselves	that	we	have
unwittingly	allowed	to	happen.	The	way	out	is	to	become	more	conscious.

What	does	it	mean,	“to	become	more	conscious”?	To	begin	with,	becoming

more	conscious	means	to	start	looking	for	the	truth	for	ourselves,	instead	of
blindly	allowing	ourselves	to	be	programmed,	whether	from	without	or	by	an
inner	voice	within	the	mind,	which	seeks	to	diminish	and	invalidate,	focusing	on
all	that	is	weak	and	helpless.	To	get	out	of	it,	we	have	to	accept	the	responsibility
that	we	have	bought	into	the	negativity	and	have	been	willing	to	believe	it.	The
way	out	of	this,	then,	is	to	start	questioning	everything.

There	are	many	models	of	the	mind.	One	of	the	most	recent	has	been	that	of
the	computer.	We	can	look	at	the	mind’s	concepts,	thoughts,	and	belief	systems
as	programs.	Because	they	are	programs,	they	can	be	questioned,	cancelled,	and
reversed;	positive	programs	can	replace	negative	ones	if	we	so	choose.	The
smaller	aspect	of	ourselves	is	very	willing	to	accept	negative	programming.

If	we	look	at	the	source	of	our	thoughts,	begin	to	identify	their	origins,	and
stop	the	vanity	of	labeling	them	as	“mine”	(and	therefore	sacrosanct),	we	notice
that	thoughts	can	be	looked	at	objectively.	We	see	that	their	origins	were	often
the	early	childhood	training	from	parents,	family,	and	teachers,	as	well	as
dribbles	and	drabbles	of	information	we	picked	up	from	playmates,	newspapers,
movies,	television,	radio,	church,	novels,	and	the	automatic	input	from	our
senses.	All	of	this	went	on	unwittingly	without	our	having	exercised	any
conscious	choice.	Not	only	that,	but	out	of	our	unconsciousness,	ignorance,
innocence,	and	naïveté,	plus	the	nature	of	the	mind	itself,	we	ended	up	as	the
composite	of	all	the	negative	garbage	prevalent	in	the	world.	Furthermore,	we
concluded	that	it	applied	to	us	personally.	As	we	become	more	aware,	we	begin

to	realize	that	we	have	a	choice.	We	can	stop	giving	authority	to	all	the	mind’s
thoughts,	begin	to	question	them,	and	find	out	if	there	is	really	any	truth	in	them
for	ourselves.

The	feeling	state	of	apathy	is	associated	with	the	belief,	“I	can’t.”	The	mind

doesn’t	like	to	hear	it,	but	in	reality	most	“I	can’ts”	are	“I	won’ts.”	The	reason
the	mind	doesn’t	want	to	hear	this	is	because	“I	can’t”	is	a	cover-up	for	other
feelings.	These	feelings	can	be	brought	to	awareness	by	posing	the	hypothetical
question	to	oneself,	“Is	it	true	that	I	won’t	rather	than	that	I	can’t?	If	I	accept	that
‘I	won’t,’	what	situations	will	be	brought	up	and	how	do	I	feel	about	them?”

As	an	example,	let’s	say	we	have	a	belief	system	that	we	can’t	dance.	We
say	to	ourselves:	“Perhaps	that’s	a	cover-up.	Maybe	the	truth	is	that	I	don’t	want
to	and	I	won’t.”	The	way	we	can	find	out	what	the	feelings	are	is	to	envision
ourselves	as	going	through	the	process	of	learning	to	dance.	As	we	do	that,	all	of
the	associated	feelings	now	start	to	come	up:	embarrassment,	pride,
awkwardness,	the	sheer	effort	of	learning	a	new	skill,	and	the	reluctance	about
the	time	and	energy	involved.	As	we	replace	“I	can’t”	with	“I	won’t,”	we
uncover	all	of	these	feelings,	which	can	then	be	surrendered.	We	see	that
learning	to	dance	means	we	have	to	be	willing	to	let	go	of	pride.	We	look	at	the
cost	and	ask	ourselves,	“Am	I	willing	to	continue	to	pay	this	price?	Would	I	be
willing	to	let	go	of	the	fear	of	not	succeeding?	Would	I	be	willing	to	let	go	of
resisting	the	effort	required?	Would	I	be	willing	to	let	go	of	the	vanity	so	that	I
could	allow	myself	to	be	awkward	as	a	learner?	Could	I	let	go	of	my	stinginess
and	smallness	and	be	willing	to	pay	for	the	lessons	and	give	the	time?”	As	all	of
the	associated	feelings	are	surrendered,	it	becomes	very	clear	that	the	real	reason
is	unwillingness—not	incapacity.

It	must	be	remembered	that	we	are	free	to	acknowledge	and	surrender	our
feelings,	and	we	are	free	not	to	surrender.	As	we	examine	our	“I	can’ts”	and	find
out	that	they	are	really	“I	won’ts,”	it	doesn’t	mean	that	we	have	to	let	go	of	the
negative	feelings	that	result	in	the	“I	won’ts.”	We	are	perfectly	free	to	refuse	to
let	go.	We	are	free	to	hang	on	to	negativity	as	long	as	we	want.	There	is	no	law
that	says	we	have	to	give	it	up.	We	are	free	agents.	But	it	makes	a	big	difference
in	our	self-concept	to	realize	that	“I	won’t	do	something”	is	quite	a	different
feeling	than	to	think	that	“I’m	a	victim	and	I	can’t.”	For	instance,	we	can	choose
to	hate	somebody	if	we	want.	We	can	choose	to	blame	them.	We	can	choose	to
blame	circumstances.	But	being	more	conscious	and	realizing	that	we	are	freely
choosing	this	attitude	puts	us	in	a	higher	state	of	consciousness	and,	therefore,
closer	to	greater	power	and	mastery	than	being	the	helpless	victim	of	a	feeling.

Blame

One	of	the	biggest	blocks	to	overcome	in	getting	out	of	depression	and	apathy	is
that	of	blame.	Blame	is	a	whole	subject	in	itself.	Looking	into	it	is	rewarding.	To
begin	with,	there	are	a	lot	of	payoffs	to	blame.	We	get	to	be	innocent;	we	get	to
enjoy	self-pity;	we	get	to	be	the	martyr	and	the	victim;	and	we	get	to	be	the
recipients	of	sympathy.

Perhaps	the	biggest	payoff	of	blame	is	that	we	get	to	be	the	innocent	victim

and	the	other	party	is	the	bad	one.	We	see	this	game	played	out	in	the	media
constantly,	such	as	the	endless	blame	games	dramatized	in	a	multitude	of
controversies,	mudslinging,	character	assassinations,	and	lawsuits.	In	addition	to
the	emotional	payoff,	blame	has	considerable	financial	benefits;	therefore,	it	is	a
tempting	package	to	be	the	innocent	victim,	as	it	is	often	financially	rewarded.
There	was	a	famous	example	of	this	in	New	York	City	many	years	ago.	A

public	conveyance	accident	occurred.	People	poured	out	of	the	front	door	of	the
vehicle,	then	gathered	in	a	small	crowd,	furnishing	their	names	and	addresses	for
future	financial	benefit.	Bystanders	quickly	caught	on	to	the	game	and	secretly
climbed	into	the	back	of	the	vehicle,	so	that	they	could	then	emerge	from	the
front	as	injured,	“innocent	victims.”	They	hadn’t	even	been	in	the	accident,	but
they	were	going	to	collect	a	reward!

Blame	is	the	world’s	greatest	excuse.	It	enables	us	to	remain	limited	and
small	without	feeling	guilty.	But	there	is	a	cost—the	loss	of	our	freedom.	Also,
the	role	of	victim	brings	with	it	a	self-perception	of	weakness,	vulnerability,	and
helplessness,	which	are	the	major	components	of	apathy	and	depression.

The	first	step	out	of	blame	is	to	see	that	we	are	choosing	to	blame.	Other

people	who	have	had	similar	circumstances	have	forgiven,	forgotten,	and
handled	the	same	situation	in	a	totally	different	way.	We	earlier	saw	the	case	of
Viktor	Frankl,	who	chose	to	forgive	the	Nazi	prison	guards	and	to	see	a	hidden
gift	in	his	experience	at	the	concentration	camps.	Because	others,	such	as	Frankl,
have	chosen	not	to	blame,	that	option	is	also	open	to	us.	We	have	to	be	honest
and	realize	that	we	are	blaming	because	we	choose	to	blame.	This	is	true,	no
matter	how	justified	the	circumstances	may	appear	to	be.	It	is	not	a	matter	of
right	or	wrong;	it	is	merely	a	matter	of	taking	responsibility	for	our	own
consciousness.	It	is	a	totally	different	situation	to	see	that	we	choose	to	blame
rather	than	to	think	that	we	have	to	blame.	In	this	circumstance,	the	mind	often
thinks,	“Well,	if	the	other	person	or	event	is	not	to	blame,	then	I	must	be.”
Blaming	others	or	ourselves	is	simply	not	necessary.

The	attraction	of	blame	arises	in	early	childhood	as	a	daily	occurrence	in	the

classroom,	playground,	and	at	home	among	siblings.	Blame	is	the	central	issue
in	the	endless	court	proceedings	and	lawsuits	that	characterize	our	society.	In
truth,	blame	is	just	another	one	of	the	negative	programs	that	we	have	allowed

our	mind	to	buy	because	we	never	stopped	to	question	it.	Why	must	something
always	be	someone’s	“fault”?	Why	must	the	whole	concept	of	“wrong”	be
introduced	to	the	situation	in	the	first	place?	Why	must	one	of	us	be	wrong,	bad,
or	at	fault?	What	seemed	like	a	good	idea	at	the	time	may	not	have	turned	out
well.	That’s	all.	Unfortunate	events	may	have	just	happened.

To	overcome	blame,	it	is	necessary	to	look	at	the	secret	satisfaction	and
enjoyment	we	get	out	of	self-pity,	resentment,	anger,	and	self-excuses,	and	to
begin	to	surrender	all	of	these	little	payoffs.	The	purpose	of	this	step	is	to	move
up	from	being	a	victim	of	our	feelings	to	choosing	to	have	them.	If	we	merely
acknowledge	and	observe	them,	begin	to	disassemble	them,	and	surrender	the
component	parts,	then	we	are	consciously	exercising	choice.	In	this	way,	we
make	a	major	move	out	of	the	morass	of	helplessness.

It	is	helpful	in	overcoming	resistance	and	taking	responsibility	for	our
negative	programs	and	feelings	to	see	that	they	come	from	the	small	aspect	of
ourselves.	It	is	the	very	nature	of	the	smallest	part	of	ourselves	to	think
negatively,	so	there’s	an	unconscious	tendency	to	agree	readily	to	its	limited
viewpoint.	But	that	is	not	the	whole	of	our	beingness;	for	outside	and	beyond	the
smaller	self	is	our	greater	Self.	We	may	not	be	conscious	of	our	inner	greatness.
We	may	not	be	experiencing	it,	but	it	is	there.	If	we	let	go	of	our	resistance	to	it,
we	can	begin	to	experience	it.	Depression	and	apathy,	therefore,	result	from	the
willingness	to	hang	on	to	the	small	self	and	its	belief	systems,	plus	the	resistance
to	our	Higher	Self,	which	consists	of	all	of	the	opposites	of	the	negative	feelings.
It	is	the	nature	of	the	universe	that	everything	in	it	is	represented	by	its	equal
and	opposite.	Thus,	the	electron’s	equal	and	opposite	is	the	positron.	Every	force
has	an	equal	and	opposite	counter-force.	Yin	is	compensated	for	by	Yang.	There
is	fear	but	there	is	also	courage.	There	is	hatred	but	its	opposite	is	love.	There	is
timidity	but	there	is	also	bravery.	There	is	stinginess	but	also	generosity.	In	the
human	psyche,	every	feeling	has	its	opposite.	The	way	out	of	negativity	is,
therefore,	the	willingness	to	acknowledge	and	let	go	of	negative	feelings	and,	at
the	same	time,	the	willingness	to	let	go	of	resisting	their	positive	opposite.
Depression	and	apathy	are	the	result	of	being	at	the	effect	of	the	negative
polarity.	How	does	this	work	in	everyday	life?

Let’s	look	again	at	the	example	of	someone’s	birthday	that	is	approaching
quickly.	Because	of	things	that	have	happened	in	the	past,	we	have	resentments
and	feel	unwilling	to	do	anything	for	the	birthday.	Somehow,	it	just	seems
impossible	to	get	out	and	shop	for	a	birthday	present.	We	resent	having	to	spend
the	money.	The	mind	conjures	up	all	kinds	of	justifications:	“I	don’t	have	time	to
shop”;	“I	can’t	forget	how	mean	she	was”;	“She	should	apologize	to	me	first.”	In
this	case,	two	things	are	operating:	clinging	to	the	negative	and	the	smallness	in

ourselves,	and	resisting	the	positive	and	the	greatness	in	ourselves.	The	way	out
of	apathy	is	to	see,	first	of	all,	that	“I	can’t”	is	an	“I	won’t.”	In	looking	at	the	“I
won’t,”	we	see	that	it	is	there	because	of	negative	feelings	and,	as	they	come	up,
they	can	be	acknowledged	and	let	go.	It	is	also	apparent	that	we	are	resisting
positive	feelings.	These	feelings	of	love,	generosity,	and	forgiveness	can	be
looked	at	one	by	one.

We	can	sit	down	and	imagine	the	quality	of	generosity	and	let	go	resisting

it.	Is	there	something	generous	within	ourselves?	In	this	case,	we	may	not	be
willing	to	apply	it	to	the	birthday	person	in	the	beginning.	What	we	can	begin	to
see	is	the	existence	of	such	a	quality	as	generosity	within	our	consciousness.	We
begin	to	see	that,	as	we	let	go	resisting	the	feeling	of	generosity,	there	is
generosity.	We	do,	in	fact,	enjoy	giving	to	others	under	certain	circumstances.
We	begin	to	remember	the	positive	flood	of	feeling	that	comes	upon	us	when	we
express	gratitude	and	acknowledge	the	gifts	that	others	have	given	us.	We	see
that	we	have	really	been	suppressing	a	desire	to	forgive	and,	as	we	let	go	of	the
resistance	to	being	forgiving,	there	emerges	the	willingness	to	let	go	of	the
grievance.	As	we	do	this,	we	stop	identifying	with	our	small	self	and	become
consciously	aware	that	there	is	something	in	us	that	is	greater.	It	is	always	there
but	hidden	from	view.

This	process	is	applicable	in	all	negative	situations.	It	enables	us	to	change
the	context	by	which	we	perceive	our	current	situation.	It	enables	us	to	give	it	a
new	and	different	meaning.	It	lifts	us	up	from	being	the	helpless	victim	to	the
conscious	chooser.	In	the	example	given,	it	doesn’t	mean	that	we	have	to	rush
out	and	buy	a	birthday	gift.	But	it	does	mean	that	we	are	now	aware	that	we	are
in	our	current	position	out	of	choice.	We	have	total	freedom,	with	greater
latitude	of	action	and	choice.	This	is	a	much	higher	state	of	consciousness	than
the	helpless	victim	who	is	trapped	by	a	past	resentment.

One	of	the	laws	of	consciousness	is:	We	are	only	subject	to	a	negative
thought	or	belief	if	we	consciously	say	that	it	applies	to	us.	We	are	free	to
choose	not	to	buy	into	a	negative	belief	system.

How	does	this	work	in	everyday	life?	Let’s	take	a	common	example.	The

newspapers	report	unemployment	is	at	a	record	high.	The	television	news
commentator	states:	“No	jobs	are	available.”	At	this	point,	we	are	free	to	refuse
to	buy	into	the	negative	thought	form.	We	can	say	instead,	“Unemployment	does
not	apply	to	me.”	By	refusing	to	accept	the	negative	belief,	it	now	has	no	hold
over	our	own	life.

Examples	from	personal	experience	reveal	that,	during	periods	of	high
unemployment	such	as	after	World	War	II,	there	was	no	problem	getting	a	job.
As	a	matter	of	fact,	one	could	have	two	or	even	three	jobs	at	the	same	time:

dishwasher,	waiter,	bellhop,	cab	driver,	bartender,	factory	worker,	greenhouse
worker,	and	window-washer.	This	was	the	consequence	of	a	belief	system	that
said:	“Unemployment	applies	to	others	but	not	to	me,”	and	“Where	there’s	a
will,	there’s	a	way.”	There	was	also	a	willingness	to	relinquish	pride	in	return	for
employment.

Another	example	is	that	of	belief	systems	having	to	do	with	epidemic
diseases.	A	few	years	ago,	fourteen	acquaintances	were	observed	closely	during
an	epidemic	of	flu.	Of	the	fourteen	people,	eight	came	down	with	the	flu,	but	six
did	not.	What	is	important	here	is	not	that	eight	people	came	down	with	the	flu,
but	that	six	did	not!	In	any	epidemic,	there	are	people	who	do	not	“catch	it.”
Even	during	the	depths	of	the	depression,	there	were	still	people	who	became
wealthy	and	even	millionaires.	The	thought	of	poverty	was	“catching”	in	those
days,	but	somehow	those	people	did	not	buy	into	it;	therefore,	it	did	not	apply	to
them.	For	negativity	to	apply	to	our	life,	we	must	first	subscribe	to	it	and,
secondly,	give	it	the	energy	of	belief.	If	we	have	the	power	to	make	negativity
manifest	in	our	life,	obviously	our	mind	also	has	the	power	to	make	its	converse
come	true.

Choosing	the	Positive
One	surprising	effect	of	the	willingness	to	let	go	of	our	inner	negativity	is	the
discovery	that	the	polar	opposite	of	the	negative	feelings	exists.	There	is	an	inner
reality	that	we	can	term	our	“inner	greatness”	or	“Higher	Self.”	It	has	much
more	power	than	the	inner	negativity.	In	return	for	letting	go	of	the	payoffs	that
we	were	getting	from	the	negative	position,	we	are	now	surprised	by	the	positive
payoffs	that	stem	from	the	power	of	our	positive	feelings.	For	example,	when	we
let	go	of	blame,	we	experience	forgiveness.

Our	Higher	Self,	which	we	might	say	is	the	composite	of	our	higher

feelings,	has	almost	unlimited	capabilities.	It	can	create	employment
opportunities.	It	can	create	situations	for	the	healing	of	relationships.	It	has	the
power	to	create	the	opportunity	for	loving	relationships,	financial	opportunities,
and	physical	healing.	As	we	stop	giving	authority	and	energy	to	all	of	the
negative	programs	that	stem	from	our	own	thinking,	we	stop	giving	away	our
power	to	others	and	begin	to	own	it	back	again.	This	results	in	a	rise	of	self-
esteem,	the	return	of	creativity,	and	the	opening	of	a	positive	vision	of	the	future
that	replaces	fearfulness.

We	can	experiment	with	someone	with	whom	we	have	a	poor	relationship
due	to	our	holding	of	resentments.	We	can	sit	down	and	say	to	ourselves	that	this
will	merely	be	an	experiment.	The	purpose	for	this,	we	tell	ourselves,	is	strictly
to	learn;	that	is,	we	want	to	become	familiar	with	the	laws	of	consciousness	and

to	watch	the	phenomena	that	occur.	We	acknowledge	the	payoffs	we	have	been
getting	from	our	negative	feelings.	We	surrender	each	component	and,	at	the
same	time,	let	go	resisting	that	within	us	which	would	be	willing	to	heal	the
relationship.	At	this	point,	it	is	not	necessary	to	have	any	personal	contact	with
the	other	person.	We	are	doing	this	experiment	for	our	own	sake	and	not	for
them.

As	we	look	within	ourselves,	we	ask,	“What	is	the	anger	covering	up?”
Underneath	the	anger,	we	are	likely	to	find	fear.	Aside	from	the	fear,	we	also
find	jealousy.	We	find	competitiveness	and	all	the	other	little	components	of	the
feeling	complex	that	have	blocked	the	relationship.	The	simultaneous	letting	go
of	the	negative	and	letting	go	of	resisting	the	positive	result	in	a	shift	of	inner
energies,	and	there	is	an	accompanying	subtle	change	in	our	self-esteem.	Letting
go	of	our	resistance	to	the	willingness	to	have	something	positive	happen	in	the
relationship	is	all	that	is	necessary.	We	can	then	just	sit	back	and	watch	what
occurs.	In	this	experiment,	we	are	not	interested	in	whether	or	not	the	other
person	“gets	it.”	We	are	only	interested	that	we	get	it.	We	are	only	interested	in
moving	our	own	position	in	the	matter	and,	then,	we	just	watch	what	happens.	A
very	rewarding	experience	usually	ensues,	which	will	take	different	forms
depending	on	the	circumstances.

Another	cause	for	apathy	is	the	residual	of	a	previously	experienced
traumatic	overwhelm	which	has	not	been	resolved.	The	mind	projects	on	to	the
future	with	the	expectation	that	the	past	will	be	repeated.	When	we	discover	this
unconscious	dynamic,	we	can	choose	to	look	again	at	the	emotional	complex,
disassemble	it	into	its	component	parts,	let	go	of	the	negative	aspects,	and	let	go
of	our	resistance	to	the	positive	ones.	As	we	do	this,	our	perspective	of	the	future
changes.	We	can	forgive	ourselves	that,	at	the	time	of	the	previous	emotional
overwhelm,	we	simply	didn’t	know	how	to	handle	it.	There	were	a	lot	of
residuals	that	left	us	emotionally	disabled	at	that	time.	But,	because	in	the
unconscious	mind	there	is	no	such	thing	as	time,	we	can	choose	at	any	time	in
the	present	to	heal	the	past	event.	As	we	go	through	our	own	emotional	healing
for	our	own	sake,	that	past	event	now	begins	to	take	on	a	different	meaning.	Our
Higher	Self	begins	to	create	a	new	context	for	it.	We	can	see	the	hidden	gift.	We
can	end	up	acknowledging	with	gratitude	that	it	gave	us	a	new	opportunity	to
learn,	to	grow,	and	to	acquire	wisdom.

One	of	the	most	common	areas	in	which	we	see	this	emotional	crippling	is
after	divorce.	All	too	often	it	is	followed	by	bitterness	and	the	impaired	capacity
to	create	a	new	loving	relationship.	The	unwillingness	to	let	go	of	the	blame
continues	the	emotional	crippling,	which	can	go	on	for	years,	or	even	a	lifetime.
When	we	come	upon	bitterness,	what	we	have	really	discovered	is	an

unhealed	area	in	our	own	emotional	makeup,	and	the	effort	that	we	put	into
healing	it	will	bring	enormous	rewards.	In	any	situation	which	involves
suffering,	we	have	to	ask	ourselves:	“How	long	am	I	willing	to	pay	the	cost?
What	were	the	karmic	propensities	to	begin	with?	How	much	blame	is	enough?
Is	there	a	time	to	call	an	end	to	it?	How	long	will	I	hang	on	to	it?	How	much
sacrifice	am	I	willing	to	pay	to	the	other	person	for	their	wrongs,	real	or
imaginary?	How	much	guilt	is	enough?	How	much	self-punishment	is	enough?
When	will	I	give	up	the	secret	pleasure	of	the	self-punishment?	When	does	the
sentence	come	to	an	end?”	When	we	really	examine	it,	we	will	always	find	that
we	have	been	punishing	ourselves	for	ignorance,	naïveté,	innocence,	and	lack	of
inner	education.

We	can	ask	ourselves:	“When	was	I	ever	trained	in	the	techniques	of
emotional	self-healing?	When	I	went	to	school,	did	they	teach	me	courses	on
consciousness?	Did	anybody	ever	tell	me	that	I	had	the	freedom	to	choose	what
went	into	my	mind?	Was	I	ever	taught	that	I	could	refuse	all	of	the	negative
programming?	Did	anybody	ever	tell	me	the	laws	of	consciousness?”	If	not,	why
beat	ourselves	up	about	having	innocently	believed	certain	things?	Why	not	stop
beating	ourselves	up	right	now?

We	all	did	what	we	thought	was	best	in	the	moment.	“It	seemed	like	a	good

idea	at	the	time”	is	what	we	can	say	about	our	past	actions	and	those	of	others.
We’ve	all	been	unwittingly	programmed	without	our	conscious	assent.	Out	of
our	confusion,	ignorance,	and	naïveté,	we	bought	into	the	negative	programs.
We	let	them	run	us.	But	now	we	can	choose	to	stop.	We	can	choose	a	different
direction.	We	can	choose	to	become	more	aware,	more	conscious,	more
responsible,	and	more	discerning.	We	can	refuse	to	sit	there	like	a	blank	tape
recorder,	taking	in	every	program	the	world	hands	us.	The	world	is	only	too
willing	to	exploit	our	naiveté	and	play	upon	our	smallness,	with	all	of	its	vanities
and	fears.

When	we	become	aware	of	how	we	were	manipulated,	exploited,	and	taken

in,	anger	is	going	to	come	up.	Be	ready	to	handle	it.	It’s	okay	to	be	angry.	It’s
better	to	be	angry	than	apathetic	by	a	long	shot.	In	anger,	we	have	a	lot	of
energy.	We	can	do	something	about	it.	We	can	take	action.	We	can	change	our
mind.	We	can	reverse	direction.	Then,	it’s	easy	to	jump	from	anger	to	courage.
On	the	level	of	courage,	we	can	see	it,	examine	it,	and	observe	how	it	all
happens.

We	begin	to	see	that	our	smallness	was	a	bill	of	goods	that	we	bought.	In
that	investigation,	we	will	stumble	upon	our	own	inner	innocence.	When	we
rediscover	it,	we	can	let	go	of	a	lot	of	guilt.	When	the	guilt	goes,	necessity	for
self-punishment	goes	with	it,	and	that	lifts	us	right	out	of	apathy	and	depression.

We	can	choose	to	revalidate	ourselves,	our	value,	and	our	worth.	And	we	can	see
how	others	were	programmed	just	as	we	were.	They,	too,	were	doing	what	they
thought	was	best	at	the	time.	We	don’t	have	to	blame	them	or	ourselves	any
more.	We	can	give	up	the	whole	blame	game	as	obsolete	and	ineffectual.

The	Company	We	Keep
Another	valuable	technique	for	getting	out	of	apathy,	depression,	and	situations
which	are	predominantly	being	run	by	the	thought,	“I	can’t,”	is	to	choose	to	be
with	other	persons	who	have	resolved	the	problem	with	which	we	struggle.	This
is	one	of	the	great	powers	of	self-help	groups.	When	we	are	in	a	negative	state,
we	have	given	a	lot	of	energy	to	negative	thought	forms,	and	the	positive
thought	forms	are	weak.	Those	who	are	in	a	higher	vibration	are	free	of	the
energy	from	their	negative	thoughts	and	have	energized	positive	thought	forms.
Merely	to	be	in	their	presence	is	beneficial.	In	some	self-help	groups,	this	is
called	“hanging	out	with	the	winners.”	The	benefit	here	is	on	the	psychic	level	of
consciousness,	and	there	is	a	transfer	of	positive	energy	and	relighting	of	one’s
own	latent	positive	thought	forms.	In	some	self-help	groups	this	is	called
“getting	it	by	osmosis.”	It	is	not	necessary	to	know	how	it	happens,	but	merely
that	it	does	happen.

It	is	common	to	witness	this	phenomenon.	For	instance,	in	our	society	most

people	have	been	trained	to	be	logical	and	left-brained	in	their	orientation.
However,	some	people	from	birth	are	right-brain	oriented.	Such	right-brain
persons	are	characterized	by	greater	powers	of	intuition,	creativity,	telepathic
communication,	and	awareness	of	thought	forms	and	energy	vibrations.
Frequently	included	among	these	capabilities	is	the	capacity	to	see	the	bio-
energy	field	around	the	human	body	called	the	aura.	When	in	the	presence	of
people	with	this	capacity,	it	becomes	possible	to	share	that	capacity.

This	was	true	even	as	a	skeptical,	logical,	left-brain	male	scientist	who	was

in	the	company	of	people	with	a	capacity	to	see	auras.	Upon	following	their
instructions	on	how	to	see	the	aura,	surprisingly,	there	was	indeed	a	visible	field
of	light	around	people’s	heads.	In	particular,	the	aura	around	one	man	seemed	to
be	almost	like	“ectoplasm”	hung	predominantly	over	his	left	ear.	On	the	right
side	of	the	head,	however,	there	was	practically	nothing	to	be	seen.	To	know
whether	this	phenomenon	was	real	and	not	coming	from	the	imagination,	it	was
confirmed	by	poking	someone	nearby	who	was	adept	at	seeing	auras.	She	also
saw	an	aura	that	was	very	wide	on	one	side	and	practically	absent	on	the	other.
The	capacity	to	see	auras	was	available	only	when	in	the	presence	of	others
with	that	capacity.	Upon	leaving	the	instructional	situation	where	there	had	been
people	who	could	see	auras,	the	capacity	was	no	longer	there.	In	the	following

years,	when	in	the	company	of	friends	who	could	see	auras,	the	capacity
returned.	One	time,	in	the	presence	of	a	woman	psychologist	at	a	clinic—whose
job	was	that	of	psychic	diagnosis	by	means	of	observing	people’s	auras	and	their
changing	color	patterns—there	suddenly	was	the	capacity	not	only	to	see	auras,
but	also	to	see	them	in	their	scintillating	colors	and	watch	the	aura	change	in
response	to	fluctuating	emotions.	Just	by	talking	with	her,	that	capacity	was
suddenly	available.

It	is	as	though	when	we	are	in	the	proximity	of	the	auras	of	people	with
certain	capacities,	some	transfer	of	ability	can	take	place.	Simply	put,	we	are
either	positively	or	negatively	influenced	by	the	company	we	keep.	It	is	unlikely
that	we	will	overcome	an	inhibition	if	we	choose	to	be	in	the	company	of	others
who	have	our	same	problem.

This	phenomenon	was	evident	in	the	case	of	a	divorced	woman	who	came

for	a	consultation.	She	wanted	to	know	whether	or	not	she	should	have
psychotherapy.	Her	complaints	were	a	recurrent	ulcer	and	migraine	headaches.
As	the	story	unfolded,	great	bitterness	over	an	unfortunately	traumatic	divorce
came	forth.	She	had	joined	a	consciousness-raising	feminist	group,	she	said.	She
described	this	particular	group	as	almost	completely	made	up	of	divorced
women	who	were	bitter,	angry,	and	hateful	of	men.	As	a	group,	they	were
getting	a	lot	of	payoff	from	their	negativity.	In	reality,	their	lives	were	forlorn
and	rather	pathetic,	as	they	struggled	to	regain	their	self-esteem	through
extremes	and	marked	emotional	imbalance.

After	listening	to	her	story	and	investigating	her	life	circumstances,	it	was
suggested	that	instead	of	psychotherapy,	she	follow	one	simple	recommendation
for	a	period	of	three	months.	If	it	didn’t	work,	then,	she	could	reassess	the	need
for	psychotherapy.	The	recommendation	was	merely	to	discontinue	her
association	with	the	group	and	with	her	bitter,	divorced	friends	and,	instead,	seek
the	company	of	people	who	had	successfully	re-established	relationships	despite
former	divorces.

At	first	she	resisted	and	claimed	that	she	had	nothing	in	common	with	these

group	members.	Then	she	acknowledged	two	basic	facts.	First,	it	was	far	more
energy-saving	to	foster	relationships	with	positive	people.	Secondly,	one	of	the
laws	of	consciousness	is	that	“like	goes	to	like”;	bitterness	attracts	bitterness,
whereas	love	attracts	love.	She	asked	herself,	“Where	has	my	bitterness	taken
me?	Have	I	gotten	anything	out	of	it	that	is	positive	and	helpful?”	As	time
progressed,	she	stopped	spending	time	with	her	group	and	began	to	pursue
relationships	with	healthier,	more	balanced	people.

In	the	company	of	happier	people,	she	had	an	exhilarated	awareness	of	how

much	negativity	she	was	holding	inside	of	herself.	She	began	to	be	aware	that

she	was	consciously	holding	negativity	and	choosing	to	hold	it,	and	she	began	to
look	at	the	cost	of	such	negativity.	Her	whole	social	life	changed.	She	became
smiling	and	happier.	Her	migraine	headaches	disappeared.	Eventually,	she	fell	in
love	again	and	joked	that	falling	in	love	was	the	best	cure	she	had	ever
discovered	for	an	ulcer!

If	we	find	ourselves	in	the	state	of	apathy,	we	can	discover	the	underlying
program	by	asking	ourselves	what	we	are	trying	to	prove.	Are	we	trying	to	prove
that	life	is	rotten?	That	this	is	a	hopeless	world?	That	it	wasn’t	our	fault?	That
one	can’t	find	love?	That	happiness	is	impossible?	What	are	we	trying	to	justify?
How	much	are	we	willing	to	pay	to	be	“right”?	As	we	acknowledge	and	let	go	of
the	feelings	that	arise	in	response	to	these	questions,	the	answers	begin	to
appear.

CHAPTER

5

GRIEF

Grief	is	an	experience	common	to	us	all.	In	grief,	we	feel	that	things	are	too
difficult;	we’ll	never	make	it;	we	are	unloving	and	unlovable.	We	have	thoughts
such	as,	“All	the	years	I’ve	wasted.”	It	is	a	feeling	of	sadness	and	loss.
Loneliness.	The	feeling	of	“if	only.”	Regret.	Feelings	of	abandonment,	pain,
helplessness,	and	hopelessness.	Nostalgia.	Melancholy.	Depression.	Longing.
Irretrievable	loss.	Heartbrokenness.	Anguish.	Disappointment.	Pessimism.

Grief	can	be	precipitated	by	the	loss	of	a	belief	system,	a	relationship,	a

capacity	or	role,	a	hope	about	ourselves,	or	an	overall	attitude	toward	our	life,
external	circumstances,	or	institutions.	It’s	the	feeling:	“I’ll	never	get	over	this.
This	one	is	too	difficult.	I	tried,	but	nothing	helps.”	There	is	a	feeling	of
vulnerability	to	pain	and	suffering,	and	so	we	see	a	great	deal	of	it	in	the	external
world	to	reinforce	and	justify	our	own	inner	feeling.	There	is	a	crying	for
someone	to	help	because	we	can’t	do	anything	about	it,	and	we	feel	that	maybe
someone	else	can	do	it	for	us.	This	is	in	contradistinction	to	apathy,	where	there
is	a	feeling	that	no	one	can	help.

Allowing	the	Grief
Most	of	us	carry	a	great	deal	of	suppressed	grief.	Men	especially	are	prone	to
hide	that	particular	feeling,	as	it	is	considered	unmanly	and	un-masculine	to	cry.
Most	people	are	afraid	of	the	amount	of	grief	they	have	suppressed;	they	are
terrified	that	they	will	be	swamped	and	overwhelmed	by	it.	People	will	say,	“If	I
were	ever	to	start	crying,	I	would	never	stop”;	“There	is	so	much	grief	in	the
world,	grief	in	my	life,	grief	in	my	family	and	friends”;	“O,	the	untold	tragedies

	
of	life!	All	of	the	disappointments	and	smashed	hopes!”	Suppressed	grief	is
responsible	for	many	psychosomatic	conditions	and	health-related	complaints.
Instead	of	suppressing	the	feeling,	if	it	is	allowed	to	come	up	and	be
relinquished,	we	can	quickly	jump	from	grief	to	acceptance.	The	continuing
grief	over	a	loss	is	due	to	the	resistance	to	accepting	that	state	and	allowing	the
grief	to	expend	itself.	The	persistence	of	a	feeling	is	due	to	the	resistance	to
allowing	it	to	be	relinquished	(e.g.,	“Cry	me	a	river”).	Once	we	accept	the	fact
that	we	can	handle	grief,	we	are	already	up	into	pride.	The	feeling	of	“I	can	do
it”	and	“I	can	handle	it”	brings	us	to	courage.	With	the	courage	to	face	our	inner
feelings	and	let	them	go,	we	thus	move	on	to	the	levels	of	acceptance	and
eventually	peace.	When	we	let	go	of	a	lot	of	grief	we	have	been	holding	over	the
years,	our	friends	and	family	will	notice	a	change	in	our	facial	expression.	Our
step	will	be	lighter	and	we	will	look	younger.

Grief	is	time-limited.	This	fact	gives	us	the	courage	and	willingness	to	face
grief.	If	we	don’t	resist	the	feeling	of	grief	and	totally	surrender	to	it,	it	will	run
out	in	about	10–20	minutes;	then	it	will	stop	for	variable	lengths	of	time.	If	we
keep	surrendering	to	it	every	time	it	comes	up,	then	it	will	eventually	run	out.
We	just	allow	ourselves	to	experience	it	fully.	We	only	have	to	tolerate	an
overwhelming	grief	for	10–20	minutes,	and	then	all	of	a	sudden	it	will	disappear.
If	we	resist	the	grief,	then	it	will	go	on	and	on.	Suppressed	grief	can	go	on	for
years.

In	facing	grief,	we	often	have	to	acknowledge	and	let	go	of	our	shame	and

embarrassment	about	having	the	feeling	in	the	first	place.	For	men	this	is
especially	so.	We	have	to	relinquish	our	fear	of	the	feeling	and	our	fear	of	being
swamped	and	overwhelmed	by	it.	It	helps	to	realize	that	letting	go	of	the
resistance	to	the	feeling	moves	us	quickly	through	it.	Traditionally,	women	have
said	out	of	their	own	experience	and	wisdom:	“A	good	cry	makes	me	feel
better.”	Many	a	man	has	been	surprised	when	he	learned	the	truth	of	this.

Experientially,	there	was	the	surprising	and	almost	immediate	relief	from	a

pounding	headache	as	soon	as	the	grief	about	a	past	situation	was	allowed	to
come	up.	As	the	grief	surfaced,	there	was	the	sentence,	“Men	don’t	cry.”	After
letting	go	of	the	masculine	pride	about	crying,	then	up	came	a	fear	that	the
crying	would	never	stop	once	it	was	allowed	to	start.	As	soon	as	that	fear	was
gone,	then	there	was	anger.	It	was	anger	at	a	society	that	forces	men	to	suppress
their	feelings,	and	anger	at	the	notion	that	men	are	not	even	supposed	to	have
feelings.	With	the	letting	go	of	that	anger,	the	level	of	courage	was	reached,	and
then	the	needed	crying	could	be	allowed.	Not	only	was	there	relief	from	the
headache	but,	when	the	torrent	of	sobs	subsided,	a	profound	peacefulness	settled.
Henceforth,	the	subject	did	not	have	to	be	avoided.

Once	a	man	has	fully	let	the	grief	come	up	and	totally	freed	himself	from

that	suppressed	energy,	he	is	peaceful	and	his	view	of	his	own	masculinity
changes.	He	realizes	that	his	masculinity	is	now	more	complete.	He	is	still	just	as
much	of	a	man,	but	now	he	is	a	man	who	can	also	be	in	touch	with	and	handle
his	own	feelings.	Consequently,	he	is	more	adequate,	more	capable,	more	well-
rounded,	more	understanding,	more	mature,	more	capable	of	relating	to	and
understanding	others,	more	compassionate,	and	more	loving.

The	psychological	basis	of	all	grief	and	mourning	is	attachment.	Attachment

and	dependence	occur	because	we	feel	incomplete	within	ourselves;	therefore,
we	seek	objects,	people,	relationships,	places,	and	concepts	to	fulfill	inner	needs.
Because	they	are	unconsciously	utilized	to	fulfill	an	inner	need,	they	come	to	be
identified	as	“mine.”	As	more	energy	is	poured	into	them,	there	is	a	transition
from	identifying	with	the	external	objects	as	“mine”	to	being	an	actual	extension
of	“me.”	Loss	of	the	object	or	person	is	experienced	as	a	loss	of	our	own	self	and
an	important	part	of	our	emotional	economy.	Loss	is	experienced	as	a
diminution	of	the	quality	of	ourselves,	which	the	object	or	person	represented.
The	more	emotional	energy	invested	in	the	object	or	person,	the	greater	will	be
the	feeling	of	loss	and	the	greater	the	pain	associated	with	the	undoing	of	the
bonds	of	dependence.	Attachment	creates	a	dependency,	and	dependency,
because	of	its	nature,	intrinsically	carries	with	it	a	fear	of	loss.

Within	each	person,	there	is	the	child,	parent,	and	adult.	When	grief	comes
up,	it	is	rewarding	to	ask,	“Within	myself,	is	it	the	child,	parent,	or	adult	that	is
the	source	of	this	feeling?”	For	example,	the	“child”	within	a	person	is	scared
that	something	will	happen	to	a	beloved	dog.	It	wonders,	“How	will	I	make	it?”
The	inner	adult	also	feels	grief,	but	the	adult	accepts	the	inevitable.	The	little
kitty	or	doggie	is	not	immortal.	The	adult	in	us	regretfully	accepts	that
impermanency	is	a	reality	of	life.	We	accept	that	our	youth	is	not	permanent,	that
many	romantic	relationships	are	not	life-long,	and	that	our	dog	will	one	day	die.

Handling	Loss
Because	of	the	nature	of	attachment,	the	first	state	preceding	the	actual
experiencing	of	loss	is	that	of	fear	of	loss.	This	is	usually	defended	in	one	of	two
ways.	One	is	to	increase	the	intensity	of	the	attachment	by	ever-persistent
attempts	to	strengthen	the	bonds.	This	approach	is	based	on	the	fantasy	that	“the
greater	the	bond,	the	less	likelihood	of	loss.”	However,	this	is	the	very	maneuver
that	often	precipitates	loss	in	personal	relationships,	because	the	other	person
struggles	to	be	free	of	the	possessive	attachment	and	the	amount	of	restrictive
control	they	feel	being	placed	upon	them.	Thus,	because	what	we	hold	in	mind
tends	to	manifest,	the	fear	of	a	loss	can,	paradoxically,	be	the	mechanism	of

bringing	about	that	loss.

The	second	way	that	fear	of	loss	is	handled	is	by	the	psychological
mechanism	of	denial	which	is,	in	common	language,	called	“playing	ostrich.”
We	see	this	around	us	every	day	in	its	various	forms	of	refusing	to	face	the
inevitable.	All	the	warning	signs	are	there,	but	the	person	does	not	take	heed.
Thus,	the	man	who	is	obviously	in	the	process	of	losing	his	job	tends	not	to
notice.	The	partners	in	a	marriage	that	is	going	down	the	drain	take	no	corrective
action.	The	person	with	a	serious	disease	ignores	all	of	the	symptoms	and	avoids
medical	attention.	The	politicians	fail	to	look	at	social	problems,	hoping	they
will	go	away.	Whole	countries	are	oblivious	to	the	precarious	state	of	existence
(e.g.,	9-11	attack).	The	motorist	ignores	the	ominous	warning	signals	of	a
misbehaving	engine.	We	have	all	experienced	regret	that	we	didn’t	pay	attention
to	the	warning	signals	of	trouble	ahead.

To	handle	the	fear	of	loss,	we	have	to	look	at	what	purpose	the	external
person	or	object	serves	in	our	life.	What	emotional	need	is	being	fulfilled?	What
emotions	would	arise	were	we	to	lose	the	object	or	the	person?	Loss	can	be
anticipated,	and	we	can	handle	the	various	fears	associated	with	the	sense	of	loss
by	disassembling	the	emotional	complexes	that	they	represent,	and	letting	go	of
the	individual	component	feelings.

Let’s	say,	for	example,	that	you	have	a	pet	dog	to	which	you	have	been
attached	for	many	years.	It	is	obvious	that	old	Rover	is	getting	older.	You	find
that	you	don’t	like	to	think	about	his	advanced	age,	feeling	uncomfortable	at	the
prospect	of	his	death	and	putting	it	out	of	mind.	As	you	catch	yourself	doing
this,	you	realize	that	these	feelings	are	warning	signals	and	that	you	are	not
handling	the	emotional	situation.	And	so,	you	ask	yourself,	“What	purpose	is	the
dog	serving	in	my	life?	What	is	his	emotional	service	to	me?”	Love,
companionship,	devotion,	amusement,	and	diversion.	“Will	losing	the	dog	leave
these	personal	emotional	needs	unfulfilled?”	In	looking	at	this,	some	of	the	fear
can	be	acknowledged	and	relinquished.	Once	the	fear	is	let	go,	you	don’t	have	to
resort	to	denial	and	pretend	to	yourself	that	Rover	will	live	forever.

Another	emotion	associated	with	grief	and	mourning	is	that	of	anger.	The
loss	of	that	which	is	important	frequently	brings	up	a	feeling	of	rage,	which	may
be	projected	onto	the	world,	society,	individuals	and,	ultimately,	God,	who	is
held	to	be	responsible	for	the	nature	of	the	universe.	Anger	results	from	prior
refusal	to	accept	the	fact	that	all	relationships	and	possessions	in	this	life	are
transitory.	Even	the	physical	body,	which	is	our	biggest	attachment,	eventually
has	to	be	relinquished,	as	everyone	is	aware.

We	feel	that	what	has	become	important	or	comforting	to	us	is	a	permanent

attachment.	Consequently,	when	that	illusion	is	threatened,	there	is	anger,

resentment,	and	self-pity,	feelings	which	can	result	in	chronic	bitterness.
“Impotent	rage”	is	associated	with	the	desire	to	change	the	nature	of	the	world
and	the	impossibility	of	doing	so.	In	facing	this	fact	of	existence,	a	major	loss
can	therefore	bring	about	a	shift	in	our	philosophical	position.	One	major	loss
can	awaken	us	to	the	nature	of	all	attachments	and	all	relationships,	or	we	may
again	deny	the	obvious	fact	that	all	relationships	are	transitory	and	furiously	re-
intensify	existing	bonds	to	compensate	for	the	loss.

A	part	of	handling	denial	of	the	inevitability	of	loss	is	seeing	through
attempts	at	manipulation.	In	fantasy,	the	mind	tries	to	develop	tactics	so	as	to
avoid	the	loss.	This	may	take	the	form	of	becoming	“gooder”	or	more	hard-
working,	more	honest,	more	persevering,	or	more	loyal.	In	religious	persons,	this
may	take	the	form	of	trying	to	manipulate	God	by	promises	and	bargains.	In
relationships,	it	may	take	the	form	of	over-compensatory	behavior.	The	spouse
becomes	ever	more	dutiful,	loving,	and	attentive	in	an	attempt	to	prevent	a
breakup.	The	inattentive	husband	suddenly	starts	bringing	home	gifts	and
flowers	instead	of	getting	to	the	root	cause	of	the	problem.

When	the	denial	breaks	down,	the	manipulations	have	not	worked,	and	the

fear	has	been	passed	through,	then	the	depression	itself,	the	actual	process	of
mourning	and	grief,	takes	place.	All	of	these	emotional	stages	can	be	worked
through	much	more	rapidly	by	the	process	of	letting	go,	in	which	the
inevitability	of	the	emotion	of	grief	is	surrendered	to	and	replaced	by	a
willingness	to	let	go	of	resistance	and	let	the	process	pass	through	and	complete
itself.	There	can	be	a	decision	to	let	go	of	resisting	the	grief.	Instead	of	denial
and	resistance,	you	plunge	into	it	and	get	over	it.	You	have	a	“good	cry”	over	old
Rover	or	the	lost	relationship.

Associated	with	the	feeling	of	grief	is	always	a	variable	amount	of	guilt.

This	is	based	on	the	fantasy	that	the	loss	represents	a	punishment	or	that	a
different	attitude	or	behavior	would	have	prevented	it	from	happening.	Unless	it
is	relinquished,	the	guilt	can	then	recycle	and	refuel	the	anger	and	rage.	The
unacknowledged	and	unrelinquished	rage	may	be	projected	onto	others	in	the
environment	in	the	form	of	blame.	Blame	projected	onto	other	relationships
may,	then,	compound	the	loss	by	bringing	about	further	loss.

This	happens	frequently	between	marital	partners	as	a	result	of	the	death	of

a	child.	It	has	been	reported	that	the	divorce	rate	among	parents	who	have	lost
children	is	as	high	as	90%.	Because	of	the	projection	of	blame,	a	severe	loss	is
then	compounded	by	another	severe	loss—that	of	a	marital	partner.	An	example
of	this	type	of	reaction	is	the	case	of	a	forty-year-old	woman.	She	had	an
excellent	marriage	for	twenty	years	with	an	attentive,	dutiful	husband.	Her
youngest	son	developed	leukemia.	When	he	died,	she	went	into	grief	and

mourning	and,	more	importantly,	developed	a	rage	reaction.	It	took	the	form	of
hatred.	She	hated	the	doctors;	she	hated	the	hospital;	she	hated	God;	she	hated
her	husband	and	the	existing	children.	Her	rage	became	so	uncontrollable	that
she	became	physically	violent	and	threatening.	Several	times	the	police	had	to	be
called	to	control	her	violent	behavior.	Finally	the	other	children	left	home	out	of
fear	of	the	chaos,	physical	abuse,	and	menacing	emotional	states.	Her	husband
left	no	stone	unturned	in	trying	to	help	her	with	the	rage,	but	she	vented	her	fury
upon	him	as	well,	violently	attacking	him	on	several	occasions.	Finally,	in
desperation	and	despair,	he	was	driven	from	the	home.	The	chaotic	situation
ultimately	ended	in	a	divorce	in	which	the	woman	lost	her	home.	It	was	almost
five	years	before	the	rage	subsided,	at	which	time	the	woman	had	destroyed	her
whole	life	and	now	had	to	start	over	from	scratch,	rebuilding	a	new	life.

When	all	the	negative	emotions	have	been	worked	through,	surrendered	to

and	let	go	of,	relief	finally	occurs,	and	the	former	suffering	is	replaced	by
acceptance.	Acceptance	is	different	from	resignation.	In	resignation	there	are
still	residuals	of	the	previous	emotion	left.	There	is	reluctance	and	a	delaying	of
the	true	recognition	of	the	facts.	Resignation	says,	“I	don’t	like	it,	but	I	have	to
put	up	with	it.”

With	acceptance,	resistance	to	the	true	nature	of	the	facts	has	been

relinquished;	thus,	one	of	the	signs	of	acceptance	is	serenity.	With	acceptance,
the	struggle	is	over	and	life	begins	anew.	The	energies	that	were	bound	up	in	the
previous	negative	emotion	are	now	freed	up,	so	that	the	healthier	aspects	of	the
personality	are	now	re-energized.	The	creative	aspects	of	the	mind	develop
opportunities	for	new	life	situations	and	further	options	for	growth	and
experience,	accompanied	by	a	new	sense	of	aliveness.	A	well-known	and
widely-practiced	teaching	is	the	Serenity	Prayer	of	the	12-Step	groups:

God,	Grant	me	the
Serenity	to	accept	the	things	I	cannot	change,	the
Courage	to	change	the	things	I	can,	and	the
Wisdom	to	know	the	difference.

Failure	to	work	through	any	of	the	various	emotions	associated	with
mourning	and	loss	can	result	in	chronic	stuckness	in	any	of	its	components.
Thus,	it	can	result	in	prolonged	depression,	and	prolonged	states	of	denial	in
which	the	death	of	the	person	is	actually	denied.	Chronic	guilt	or	refusal	to	work
through	the	emotions	associated	with	loss	can	result	in	delayed	grief	reaction	and
physical	disease.	The	mechanisms	behind	this	process	are	explained	in	a	later
chapter	on	the	relationship	between	mind	and	body.	The	suppressed	energy	of

the	unrelinquished	emotions	reemerges	through	the	body’s	endocrine	and
nervous	system	as	an	energetic	imbalance,	which	impairs	the	flow	of	life	energy
through	the	body’s	acupuncture	meridians.	This	results	in	pathologic	changes	in
various	organs.	It	is	a	well-known	fact	that	the	death	rate	among	the	bereaved	is
much	higher	than	that	of	the	general	population,	especially	in	the	first	year	or
two	following	the	death	of	a	spouse.

One	source	of	grief-related	guilt	is	anger	at	the	loved	one	for	departing.	This
is	often	suppressed	because	it	seems	irrational	to	the	conscious	mind.	The	virtues
of	the	departed	loved	one	are	enhanced	and	exaggerated	in	fantasy,	and	this
discrepancy	compounds	the	guilt.	How	could	we	be	angry	at	such	a	wonderful
person?	There	is	guilt	about	being	angry	at	God,	the	author	of	the	universe,	for
having	allowed	the	tragic	event	to	take	place.

A	sixty-year-old	woman	came	into	the	office	with	multiple	physical
complaints.	She	had	asthma	attacks,	allergies,	bronchitis,	frequent	episodes	of
pneumonia,	and	all	kinds	of	breathing	difficulties.	During	psychotherapy,	it	was
revealed	that	her	mother	had	died	22	years	previously,	and	she	stated	that,
curiously,	she	had	had	no	reaction	to	her	mother’s	death.	Oddly,	although	it	was
her	responsibility,	she	had	not	ordered	a	head	stone	to	be	placed	on	her	mother’s
grave.	From	information	given,	it	was	obvious	that	she	had	had	an	extremely
dependent	relationship	with	her	mother,	about	whom	she	was	ambivalent
because	of	the	mother’s	refusal	to	fill	all	of	her	dependency	needs.

It	took	many	months	for	her	to	work	through	her	massive	denial,	which	was

associated	with	guilt	over	her	anger	at	her	mother	for	leaving	her.	That	anger
was	directed	inwardly	at	herself	in	the	form	of	disease,	which	also	expressed	her
helplessness	and	her	wish	to	cry	out	for	her	mother.	The	suppressed	desire	to	cry
for	the	mother-loss	led	to	a	constant	feeling	that	she	could	not	breathe.	She	hated
herself	for	the	love/hate	feelings	for	her	mother,	and	the	sum	total	of	all	her
repressed	emotions	had	reemerged	in	the	form	of	her	multiple	respiratory
symptoms	and	complaints	(“psychosomatic”	illness).	As	she	worked	through	the
delayed	mourning,	the	reaction	to	grief	and	loss	began	to	surface.	The	extent	of
her	resistance	to	working	through	these	emotions	and	how	that	resistance	had
resulted	in	her	physical	symptoms	became	very	clear	to	her.	Eventually,	she
went	for	additional	professional	training	to	become	a	therapist	working	with	the
dying	in	a	hospice	program.

Preventing	Grief
From	the	nature	of	the	processes	we	have	described,	it	becomes	apparent	that
severe	mourning,	loss,	and	the	pathological	reactions	that	may	ensue	can	be
prevented	by	early	recognition,	and	by	preemptive	surrender	of	the	associated

feelings	while	they	are	still	mild	and	can	be	handled	without	excessive	suffering.

As	we	have	seen,	the	basis	of	all	mourning	and	loss	is	attachment,	plus	the

denial	of	the	transitory	nature	of	all	relationships.	We	can	begin	by	looking	at
our	lives,	identifying	those	areas	of	attachment,	and	asking	ourselves:	“What
internal	needs	are	they	satisfying?	What	feeling	would	come	up	if	I	were	to	lose
them?	How	can	my	inner	emotional	life	be	balanced	so	as	to	decrease	the	extent,
degree,	and	number	of	attachments	on	external	objects	and	people?”	The	greater
our	attachment	to	that	which	is	outside	of	ourselves,	the	greater	is	our	overall
level	of	fear	and	vulnerability	to	loss.	We	can	ask	ourselves	why	we	feel	so
incomplete.	“Why	am	I	so	empty	within	myself	that	I	have	to	search	for
solutions	in	the	form	of	attachment	and	dependency	on	others?”

We	can	begin	to	look	at	our	own	inner	areas	of	immaturity.	Specifically,	we

need	to	examine:	“Where	am	I	looking	to	get	love	rather	than	to	give	it?”	The
more	loving	we	are,	the	less	vulnerable	we	are	to	grief	and	loss,	and	the	less	we
need	to	seek	attachments.	When	we	have	acknowledged	and	let	go	of	all
negative	feelings,	and	we	have	graduated	from	smallness	to	the	recognition	of
our	greatness	so	that	our	internal	joy	comes	from	the	pleasure	of	giving	and
loving,	then	we	are	really	invulnerable	to	loss.	When	the	source	of	happiness	is
found	within,	we	are	immune	to	the	losses	of	the	world.

When	we	take	a	critical	look	at	our	life,	we	see	all	of	the	attachments	and
escapes	into	which	we	have	fallen.	Each	one	represents	a	potential	future	source
of	pain	and	suffering.	The	really	important	areas	should	be	closely	examined.
Let’s	take,	for	example,	the	failure	to	face	these	issues	in	the	commonly	seen,
so-called	retirement	syndrome.	Traditionally,	this	may	occur	in	women	when	the
job	of	raising	young	children	comes	to	an	end	with	their	maturity	and	leaving
home	(“empty	nest	syndrome”),	and	with	a	man	when	he	reaches	retirement	age
or	loses	his	job,	or	through	some	physical	disablement	is	unable	to	carry	on	his
previous	work.	The	reaction	that	typically	occurs	in	middle	age	is	due	to	the
many	years	of	pre-existing	denial.	There	is	often	a	lack	of	facing	the	inevitable
and	making	plans	for	other	life	activities	that	would	gratify	the	same	inner	needs
which,	in	these	cases,	are	feelings	of	self-esteem,	importance,	the	wanting	to	feel
needed	and	significant,	and	the	need	to	make	a	contribution	and	be	productive.
Anticipation	of	the	inevitable	and	preparing	for	it	now	bring	relatively
minor	discomfort	compared	to	traumatic	grief	and	loss	at	a	later	date.	We	can
look	at	our	major	love	relationships	and	honestly	examine	them.	To	what	degree
do	they	subserve	our	selfish	inner	needs?	To	what	degree	are	we	really	using	the
other	person	to	exploit	them	for	our	own	gain?	To	what	degree	are	they	merely
subserving	our	happiness?	To	find	out,	all	we	need	to	do	is	ask	ourselves:	“If
their	happiness	were	best	served	by	leaving	me,	how	would	I	feel	about	it?”	This

reveals	the	degree	to	which	we	are	trying	to	restrict	and	control	the	other	person
—which	is	attachment	and	not	love.

Over	two	thousand	years	ago,	the	Buddha	made	the	observation	that	the

basis	of	all	human	suffering	was	due	to	desire	and	attachment,	and	human
history	has	merely	proven	the	truth	of	his	teaching.	What	is	the	solution	to	that
dilemma?	As	we	can	see,	it	is	only	the	small	aspect	of	oneself	that	becomes
attached.	The	smaller	self	buys	into	the	frightened,	inadequate	set	of	programs
that	we	have	unwittingly	allowed	to	run	us.	The	purpose	of	letting	go	is	to	de-
energize	these	programs	so	that	they	no	longer	run	us;	then,	we	are	free	to
expand	into	the	greater	awareness	of	our	Higher	Self.

That	part	of	us	to	which	we	refer	as	our	“greater	Self”	loves	rather	than
seeks	love.	Consequently,	there	comes	the	awareness	that	we	are	at	all	times
surrounded	by	love,	which	is	unlimited.	Love	is	automatically	attracted	to	the
person	who	is	loving.

By	constantly	letting	go	of	our	negative	feelings,	we	thus	cure	present	pain
and	prophylactically	prevent	the	occurrence	of	future	pain.	Fear	is	replaced	by
trust	and	with	it	comes	a	profound	sense	of	wellbeing.	Immunity	to	grief	of	loss
occurs	when	we	replace	dependence	on	the	small	self	(the	personality)	with
dependence	on	the	Self	(the	Divinity	within).	We	look	for	security	to	the	Self,
which	is	eternal,	instead	of	to	the	small	self,	which	is	transitory.

CHAPTER

6

FEAR

The	many	faces	of	fear	are	familiar	to	us	all.	We	have	felt	free-floating	anxiety
and	panic.	We	have	been	paralyzed	and	frozen	by	fear,	with	its	accompanying
palpitations	and	apprehension.	Worries	are	chronic	fears.	Paranoia	is	its	extreme.
In	milder	forms	of	fear,	we	are	merely	uneasy.	When	it	is	more	severe,	we
become	scared,	cautious,	blocked,	tense,	shy,	speechless,	superstitious,
defensive,	distrustful,	threatened,	insecure,	dreading,	suspicious,	timid,	trapped,
guilty,	and	full	of	stage	fright.	There	is	fear	of	pain	and	suffering,	fear	of	living,
fear	of	loving,	fear	of	closeness,	fear	of	rejection,	fear	of	failure,	fear	of	God,
fear	of	hell,	fear	of	damnation,	fear	of	poverty,	fear	of	ridicule	and	criticism,	fear
of	being	trapped,	fear	of	inadequacy,	fear	of	danger,	fear	of	disapproval,	fear	of
boredom,	fear	of	responsibility,	fear	of	making	a	decision,	fear	of	authority,	fear
of	punishment,	fear	of	change,	fear	of	loss	of	security,	fear	of	violence,	fear	of
losing	control,	fear	of	feelings	themselves,	fear	of	manipulation,	fear	of	being
found	out,	fear	of	heights,	fear	of	sex,	fear	of	being	on	our	own	and	being
responsible,	and	fear	of	fear	itself.

There	is,	moreover,	a	cause	of	fear	of	which	many	people	are	unaware:	the
fear	of	retaliation.	This	fear	arises	from	the	desire	to	strike	out,	to	hit	back,	and
to	attack.	As	we	let	go	of	fear,	we	find	that	behind	it,	there	is	often	anger	at	the
object	of	fear	itself.	The	willingness	to	let	go	of	the	fear	and	overcome	it	already
moves	us	up	to	the	next	level,	which	is	anger.	The	fact	that	we	can	face	this
combination	of	fear/anger	feelings	and	surrender	it	moves	us	instantly	up	to
pride	and	courage.

	
The	Fear	of	Public	Speaking
One	excellent	experiment	is	to	let	go	of	the	fear	of	fear	itself.	When	we	stop
being	afraid	of	fear,	we	notice	that	it	is	just	a	feeling.	In	fact,	fear	is	far	more
tolerable	than	depression.	Surprisingly,	to	a	person	who	has	been	in	bad
depression,	the	re-emergence	of	fear	is	welcomed.	It	is	better	to	feel	scared	than
hopeless.

To	understand	how	fear	is	self-reinforcing,	we	have	to	stop	and	look	at
another	one	of	the	laws	of	consciousness:	What	one	holds	in	mind	tends	to
manifest.	What	this	means	is	that	any	thought	which	we	consistently	hold	in
mind	and	consistently	give	energy	to	will	tend	to	come	into	our	life	according	to
the	very	form	in	which	our	mind	has	held	it.	Thus,	fear	engenders	fearful
thoughts.	The	more	we	hold	these	thoughts	in	mind,	the	more	likely	the	feared
event	will	happen	in	our	life,	which	again	reinforces	our	fear.

As	a	medical	intern,	there	was	a	fear	of	public	speaking.	At	the	very	thought
of	getting	up	in	front	of	medical	colleagues	to	present	a	patient’s	case,	the	voice
would	fail	out	of	sheer	fright.	Because	of	holding	that	fear,	the	inevitable
situation	arose	that	necessitated	having	to	present	the	case	of	a	patient	to	the	staff
meeting.	After	reading	a	few	paragraphs	of	the	case	history,	the	voice	began	to
falter	and	get	weaker	and	eventually	stopped.	The	very	fear	that	had	been	held	in
mind	came	to	pass	and,	of	course,	that	occurrence	reinforced	a	fear	of	public
speaking	and	brought	on	apathy	about	it.	Henceforth,	for	many	years,	the
limiting	belief	system	operated:	“I	can’t	speak	in	public.	I’m	just	not	a	public
speaker.”	Any	and	all	speaking	occasions	were	avoided,	with	the	consequent
loss	of	selfesteem,	avoidance	of	activities,	and	limitation	of	vocational	goals.
As	the	years	passed,	the	fear	took	a	somewhat	different	form.	The	belief

system	was:	“I	don’t	want	to	speak,	because	I	might	be	a	boring	and	bad
speaker.”	Finally,	an	occasion	arose	where	it	was	necessary	to	speak	in	a	public
meeting.	There	was	the	opportunity	to	sit	down	and	find	the	courage	to	face	the
fear.	The	inner	dialogue	was:	“What’s	the	worst	possible	thing	that	could
happen?	Well,	you	could	be	terribly	boring.”	This	brought	to	mind	all	the	boring
speeches	given	by	others,	and	then	it	became	possible	to	accept	that	a	boring
speech	was	actually	common	and	certainly	not	the	end	of	the	world.	There	was	a
letting	go	of	the	pride	and	vanity	behind	that	fear.	Yes,	it	just	might	happen	that
the	speech	would	be	terribly	boring.

The	fateful	day	finally	arrived.	The	paper	was	written	out	so	all	that	was
needed	was	to	read	it.	Yes,	it	would	have	been	far	more	interesting	to	give	it
extemporaneously,	but	there	was	an	acknowledgement	and	acceptance	of	the
fear,	and	so	the	speech	was	written	out	beforehand.	The	moment	arrived	to

ascend	the	podium.	Despite	the	inner	fear	and	reading	the	speech	in	a	flat
monotone	voice,	the	feat	was	accomplished.	Afterwards	some	friends	said,	“That
was	technically	a	good	paper	but,	boy,	it	sure	was	boring.”	The	inner	self,
however,	didn’t	care;	it	was	jubilant	that	there	had	been	the	courage	and
acceptance	to	face	the	situation	and	actually	do	it.	The	fact	that	it	was	boring	was
irrelevant.	What	was	important	was	that	it	was	done	at	all.	Self-esteem	increased
because	the	fear	and	inhibition	had	been	overcome,	and	speaking	engagements
no	longer	had	to	be	avoided.	In	fact,	the	practice	developed	to	begin	all
presentations	with	a	warning	to	the	audience,	“I	am	one	of	the	most	boring
speakers	around	and,	in	fact,	I	can	be	quite	tedious.”	Surprisingly,	this	brought	a
laugh	from	the	audience.	Their	laughter	signified	acceptance	of	our	common
humanness,	and	so	the	fears	were	lifted.

It	was	discovered	that	humor	is	valuable	in	public	speaking.	It	is	a	way	of

just	being	at	one	with	the	humanness	of	the	audience	and	discovering	their
compassion.	Once	we	are	united	with	them	in	compassion,	we	can	feel	their
encouragement	as	they	cheer	us	on.	We	love	them	for	relieving	our	fear	and
accepting	us,	and	they	love	us	back	for	doing	the	very	thing	that	they	themselves
fear.	Once	this	evolution	through	the	levels	of	emotion	is	made,	there	is	an
enjoyment	of	public	speaking.	We	find	out	that	part	of	the	mind	can	be	quite
funny	when	the	occasion	arises.

Eventually,	with	complete	surrender,	reading	a	prepared	speech	dropped	off

and	the	speaking	became	extemporaneous.	With	more	experience,	the	public
speaking	improved,	which	engendered	more	speaking	engagements.	This
allowed	the	accomplishment	of	many	vocational	goals	that	heretofore	had	been
thwarted.	There	were	appearances	in	the	national	media,	such	as	talk	shows	on
television.	It	is	a	long	step	from	being	too	frightened	even	to	read	a	case	history
in	front	of	a	few	interns	to	enjoying	oneself	speaking	on	a	television	network	to
millions	of	viewers	on	The	Barbara	Walter’s	Show.

We	all	derive	great	benefit	from	liberating	ourselves	out	of	a	fearful

inhibition	into	successful	functioning,	because	that	learning	process
automatically	spills	over	into	many	other	areas	of	our	life.	We	become	more
capable,	freer	and	happier	and,	with	that,	there	is	an	inner	peace	of	mind.

The	Healing	Effect	of	Love
Fear	is	so	pandemic	in	our	society	that	it	constitutes	the	predominant	ruling
emotion	of	our	world,	as	we	know	it.	Fear	was	also	the	predominant	emotion
among	the	thousands	of	patients	treated	during	the	decades	of	clinical	practice.
Fear	is	so	extensive	and	takes	so	many	forms	that	there	are	not	enough	pages	in
this	book	to	enumerate	all	of	its	varieties.

Fear	is	associated	with	our	survival,	and	so	it	is	given	a	special	accord	in	our

minds.	For	most	people,	fear	is	so	all-pervasive	that	their	life	really	constitutes
one	giant	set	of	compensatory	devices	to	conquer	their	fears.	However,	even	this
does	not	suffice,	so	that	the	media	present	us	over	and	over	again	with	fearful
situations,	as	in	this	morning’s	news:	“Terrorist	group	threatens	to	poison	our
food	supply.”	Such	headlines	are	constant,	as	though	to	give	the	mind	further
opportunities	to	master	that	most	dreaded	of	all	emotions.	As	the	lyrics	of	the
song	put	it,	“We	are	caught	between	a	fear	of	living	and	a	fear	of	dying.”

When	all	the	mind’s	compensatory	devices	fail	and	fear	spills	forth	into
consciousness	as	overt	anxiety	attacks	or	phobias,	the	person	is	labeled	as	having
an	anxiety	neurosis.	It	is	informative	to	note	that	the	tranquilizer	Valium	is	the
biggest	selling	drug	in	America.

Fears	tend	to	escalate.	Thus,	the	typical	patient	with	phobias	shows	a
progressive	extension	of	the	fear	into	more	and	more	avenues	of	life,	leading	to
further	and	further	restrictions	of	activity,	and,	in	severe	cases,	to	total
immobilization.	This	was	the	case	of	a	patient	named	Betty.

Betty	was	thirty-four	years	old,	but	she	looked	much	older	because	she	was

thin	and	drawn.	She	entered	the	office	carrying	armloads	of	paper	bags,	which
were	later	found	to	contain	56	different	bottles	of	health	store	preparations,
vitamins,	nutritional	supplements,	plus	several	bags	of	special	food.	Her	fear	had
started	out	as	a	germ	phobia	and	soon	everything	around	her	seemed	to	be
possibly	contaminated	with	germs.	She	had	many	health	fears	of	contracting
contagious	diseases,	which	had	progressed	now	to	a	fear	of	cancer.	She	believed
every	scare	story	she	read,	so	she	was	afraid	of	nearly	every	food,	the	air	she
breathed,	and	getting	sunshine	on	her	skin.	She	wore	white	clothes	because	she
was	afraid	of	dyes	in	the	materials.

In	the	office,	she	would	never	sit	down	because	she	was	afraid	that	the	chair
might	be	contaminated.	Whenever	she	needed	a	prescription,	she	asked	that	it	be
written	from	the	middle	of	the	prescription	pad	which	had	not	been	touched.
Furthermore,	she	wanted	to	tear	the	page	from	the	pad	herself;	she	didn’t	want
me	to	touch	it	because	possibly	I	had	gotten	germs	from	shaking	hands	with	the
last	patient.	She	wore	white	gloves	at	all	times.	She	requested	to	be	treated	by
telephone	as	she	was	too	afraid	of	making	the	trip	to	the	office	again.

The	following	week	on	the	telephone,	she	said	that	she	was	afraid	to	get	up.

She	would	call	from	home	while	still	in	bed	because	now	she	was	afraid	to	go
out	on	the	streets.	She	had	developed	a	fear	of	muggers,	rapists,	and	air
pollution.	At	the	same	time,	she	was	afraid	to	stay	home	in	bed	for	fear	that	she
might	get	worse	and,	to	compound	all	her	other	fears,	she	was	afraid	that	she
was	losing	her	mind.	She	was	afraid	that	the	medication	wouldn’t	help	her	and

that	it	might	have	side	effects,	but	she	was	afraid	not	to	take	it	for	fear	that	she
would	not	get	better.	Now	she	said	that	she	had	a	fear	that	she	might	choke	on
the	pills	and	had	stopped	taking	even	her	health	pills,	much	less	the	prescribed
medication.

Her	fears	were	so	paralyzing	that	every	therapeutic	maneuver	was	totally
stymied.	She	wouldn’t	allow	me	to	talk	to	her	family.	She	was	afraid	they	would
find	out	that	she	was	seeing	a	psychiatrist	and	think	she	was	crazy.	I	was	totally
baffled	and	racked	my	brain	for	weeks	on	how	I	could	possibly	help	her.	Finally,
I	let	go.	I	experienced	the	relief	of	surrender	in	that	I	just	totally	gave	up:	“There
is	absolutely	nothing	I	can	do	to	help	her.	The	only	thing	left	to	do	is	just	to	love
her.”

And,	so,	that’s	what	I	did.	I	just	thought	of	her	lovingly,	and	frequently	I
sent	her	loving	thoughts.	I	gave	her	as	much	love	as	I	could	possibly	give	when
we	talked	on	the	telephone	and,	finally,	after	a	couple	of	months	of	“loving
therapy,”	she	got	sufficiently	better	to	come	to	the	office.	As	time	went	on,	she
improved	and	her	fears	and	inhibitions	began	to	diminish,	though	she	never	did
develop	any	insight.	She	was	too	afraid	of	talking	about	psychological	matters,
she	said,	and	so	over	the	months	and	eventually	years	of	treatment,	the	only
thing	I	ever	did	was	to	love	her.

This	case	illustrates	a	concept	that	we	previously	presented	in	the	chapter	on

apathy;	that	is,	a	higher	vibration,	such	as	love,	has	a	healing	effect	on	a	lower
vibration,	such	as	that	in	the	patient’s	case,	fear.	This	love	is	the	mechanism	of
reassurance,	and	very	often	we	can	quiet	another	person’s	fears	by	our	mere
physical	presence,	and	by	the	loving	energy	that	we	project	to	them	and	with
which	we	surround	them.	It	is	not	what	we	say,	but	the	very	fact	of	our	presence
that	has	the	healing	effect.

We	can	learn	another	one	of	the	laws	of	consciousness:	Fear	is	healed	by

love.	This	is	the	central	theme	of	the	series	of	books	by	psychiatrist	Jerry
Jampolsky	(e.g.,	Love	is	Letting	Go	of	Fear).	This	was	also	the	basis	of	the
healing	that	went	on	at	the	Attitudinal	Healing	Center	in	Manhasset,	Long
Island,	of	which	I	was	co-founder	and	medical	advisor.	Attitudinal	healing	has	to
do	with	group	interaction	with	patients	who	have	fatal	and	catastrophic	illnesses,
and	the	whole	process	of	healing	has	to	do	with	the	letting	go	of	fear	and
replacing	it	with	love.

This	is	the	same	mechanism	of	healing	demonstrated	by	the	great	saints	and

illumined	healers,	whose	very	presence	has	the	power	to	heal	because	of	the
intense	vibration	of	love	which	they	radiate.	This	healing	power—the	basis	of
spiritual	healing—is	also	transmitted	by	loving	thoughts.	The	multitudes	of
people	down	through	recorded	history	who	have	healed	by	just	this	kind	of	love

are	legendary.	In	recent	history,	for	instance,	Mother	Teresa	is	credited	with
healing	great	numbers	of	people	by	these	very	mechanisms	of	unconditional	love
and	illumined	presence.	To	people	who	are	unfamiliar	with	the	laws	of
consciousness,	these	types	of	cures	seem	miraculous.	But	to	those	who	are
familiar	with	the	laws	of	consciousness,	such	phenomena	are	commonplace	and
to	be	expected.	High	levels	of	consciousness	are	in	themselves	capable	of
healing,	transforming,	and	enlightening	others.	The	value	of	the	surrendering
mechanism	is	that,	by	letting	go	of	the	blocks	to	love,	our	capacity	to	love
increases	progressively,	and	loving	energy	has	the	capacity	to	heal	ourselves	as
well	as	others.

The	only	drawback	to	these	types	of	healings	is	that	often	the	healing	is
sustained	while	in	proximity	to	a	person	capable	of	radiating	high	levels	of	love,
but	the	illness	returns	when	people	leave	that	presence,	unless	they	themselves
have	learned	to	elevate	their	own	consciousness.

“Well,”	you	might	ask,	“if	sending	loving	thoughts	has	a	healing	power,

how	come	we	see	all	the	sick	people	in	hospitals,	whose	families	are	so
solicitous?	Why	does	the	love	of	the	family	not	heal	the	patient?”	The	answer	is
to	look	at	the	kinds	of	thoughts	that	are	being	sent	by	the	family	to	the	patient.
As	you	examine	them,	you	will	find	that	they	are	primarily	thoughts	of	anguish
and	fear,	accompanied	by	guilt	and	ambivalence.

We	might	picture	love	to	be	like	the	sunlight	and	negative	thoughts	like	the

clouds.	Whereas	our	higher,	greater	Self	is	like	the	sun,	all	the	negative	thoughts,
doubts,	fears,	anger,	and	resentments	that	we	hold	dim	the	light	of	the	sun	and,
finally,	the	light	comes	through	only	weakly.	It	was	Jesus	Christ	who	said	that
we	all,	with	faith,	potentially	have	the	power	to	heal.	The	saint,	or	person	of	high
consciousness,	is	by	definition	one	who	has	removed	the	clouds	of	negativity
and	radiates	the	full	healing	power	of	the	sun.	That	is	also	why	saintly	beings
have	such	magnetic	power	that	they	attract	multitudes	to	their	physical	presence.
As	an	example,	when	the	late	Indian	saint	Sri	Ramana	Maharshi	had	a	birthday,
25,000	people	stood	in	the	sweltering	tropical	sun	shoulder-to-shoulder	in	one
solid	mass	to	celebrate	his	presence	and	wish	him	well.

As	we	consistently	let	go	of	resisting	our	fears	and	allow	them	to	be
surrendered,	the	energy	that	was	tied	up	in	the	fear	is	relinquished	and	now
becomes	available	to	shine	forth	as	the	energy	of	love.	Therefore,	unconditional
love	has	the	greatest	power	of	all,	and	that	love	is	the	power	of	the	celebrated
saints.	Unconditional	love	is	also	the	power	of	the	mother	and	of	the	father,	the
presence	of	whom	is	so	essential	to	the	children’s	learning	to	love	as	they	grow.
It	was	Sigmund	Freud	who	observed	that	the	most	fortunate	thing	that	can
happen	to	us	growing	up	is	to	be	our	mother’s	favorite	child.

What	about	those	of	us	who	did	not	have	the	fortunate	experience	of	being
bathed	in	unconditional	love	as	we	grew	up?	There	is	the	commonly	held	belief
that	if	we	did	not	have	this	experience,	then	we	are	somehow	scarred	or	crippled
for	life;	actually,	this	is	not	so.	A	person	who	has	experienced	a	great	deal	of
love	in	early	life	has	fewer	fears	and	a	head	start,	but	this	love	is	intrinsic	within
all	of	us.	By	the	very	nature	of	our	being	and	by	the	very	nature	of	the	life
energy	that	flows	through	us	and	empowers	us	to	breathe	and	to	think,	we	all
have	that	same	vibrational	energy	level	of	love	within	us.

If,	in	looking	at	ourselves,	we	see	that	we	have	allowed	the	experience	of
our	own	nature	to	become	blocked	off	by	extensive	fears,	then	we	can	rediscover
the	love	within	us	by	utilizing	the	mechanism	of	surrender	and,	thus,	letting	go
of	the	clouds	of	negativity.	By	rediscovering	this	inner	love,	we	rediscover	the
true	source	of	happiness.

Owning	the	“Shadow”
One	of	the	blocks	to	emotional	development	is	the	fear	of	what	lies	buried	in	our
unconscious.	Carl	Jung	called	this	area,	which	we	are	unwilling	to	look	at	and	to
own,	the	“shadow.”	He	said	that	the	self	cannot	become	healed	and	whole	unless
we	look	at	and	acknowledge	the	shadow.	This	means	that	buried	within	us	all,	in
what	Jung	called	the	“collective	unconscious,”	is	everything	that	we	most	dislike
admitting	about	ourselves.	The	average	human,	he	said,	would	much	rather
project	his	shadow	onto	the	world	and	condemn	it	and	see	it	as	evil,	thinking	that
his	problem	is	to	battle	with	evil	in	the	world.	In	actuality,	the	problem	is	merely
to	acknowledge	the	presence	of	such	thoughts	and	impulses	in	ourselves.	By
acknowledging	them,	they	become	quiet.	Once	they	are	quiet,	they	no	longer
unconsciously	run	us.

In	looking	at	our	fears	of	the	unknown,	which	are	really	fears	of	what	is	in

the	depths	of	the	unconscious,	it	is	useful	to	have	a	sense	of	humor.	Once	looked
at	and	acknowledged,	the	shadow	no	longer	has	any	power.	In	fact,	it	is	only	our
fear	of	these	thoughts	and	impulses	that	give	them	any	power.	Once	we	become
acquainted	with	our	shadow,	we	no	longer	have	to	project	our	fears	upon	the
world,	and	they	begin	to	evaporate	rapidly.

What	makes	the	endless	television	programs,	which	are	concerned	with

mayhem	and	its	various	forms,	so	attractive?	It	is	because	what	is	being	acted
out	on	the	screen,	where	it	is	safe,	are	all	the	forbidden	unconscious	fantasies	in
our	own	psyche.	Once	we	are	willing	to	look	at	the	same	movies	on	the	TV
screen	of	our	own	minds	and	see	whence	they	really	originate,	the	attraction	of
such	“entertainment”	disappears.	People	who	have	acknowledged	the	content	of
their	own	shadow	have	no	interest	in	crime,	violence,	and	fearful	disasters.

One	of	the	blocks	to	becoming	acquainted	with	the	fears	in	one’s	own	mind
is	the	fear	of	the	opinions	of	others.	The	wanting	of	their	approval	goes	on	inside
of	our	minds	in	a	constant	fantasy.	We	identify	with	the	opinions	of	others,
including	authority	figures,	and	coalesce	this	in	such	a	way	that	we	hear	it	as	our
own	opinion	of	ourselves.

In	looking	at	fears,	then,	it	is	well	to	remember	that	Carl	Jung	saw	this

reservoir	of	the	forbidden	inside	the	shadow	as	a	part	of	the	collective
unconscious.	The	term	collective	unconscious	means	that	everybody	has	these
thoughts	and	fantasies.	There	is	nothing	unique	about	any	of	us	when	it	comes	to
the	way	we	symbolize	our	emotions.	Everybody	secretly	harbors	the	fear	that
they	are	dumb,	ugly,	unlovable,	and	a	failure.

The	unconscious	mind	is	not	polite.	It	thinks	in	gross	concepts.	When	it
thinks	of	the	phrase	“Murder	the	bum!,”	the	unconscious	literally	means	that.
Look	deep	within	yourself	the	next	time	somebody	cuts	you	off	in	traffic,	and
picture	what	you	would	really	do	to	that	person	if	you	were	strictly	honest	with
yourself	and	did	not	censor	the	image	coming	to	mind.	You’d	like	to	run	them
off	the	road,	wouldn’t	you?	Pulverize	them.	Push	them	off	the	cliff.	Isn’t	that
right?	That’s	the	way	the	unconscious	thinks.

The	reason	that	a	sense	of	humor	is	useful	is	because	these	images	are
comical	once	we	look	at	them.	There	is	nothing	awful	about	it;	it	is	just	the	way
the	unconscious	handles	images.	It	doesn’t	mean	that	you	are	a	rotten	person	or
that	you	are	potentially	a	criminal.	It	just	means	that	you	have	gotten	honest	and
faced	how	the	human	animal	mind	operates	in	this	dimension.	There	is	no	point
in	getting	melodramatic,	self-critical,	or	tragic	about	it.	The	unconscious	is	crude
and	uncivilized.	While	your	intellect	went	to	prep	school,	your	unconscious
remained	in	the	jungle	where	it	is	still	swinging	in	the	trees!	Looking	at	the
shadow	side	is	not	a	time	to	get	prissy	or	squeamish.	It’s	not	a	time	to	take	it
literally	either,	because	the	symbols	of	the	unconscious	are	just	that:	they	are
symbols,	and	they	are	primitive	in	nature.	If	worked	with	consciously,	they	can
empower	us	rather	than	inhibit	us.

It	takes	a	lot	of	energy	to	keep	the	shadow	buried	and	to	suppress	our
multitude	of	fears.	The	result	is	energy	depletion.	On	the	emotional	level,	it	is
expressed	as	an	inhibition	of	the	capacity	to	love.

In	the	world	of	consciousness,	like	goes	to	like,	so	that	fear	attracts	fear	just

as	its	corollary	is	true	that	love	attracts	love.	The	more	fear	we	hold,	the	more
fearful	situations	we	attract	to	our	life.	Each	fear	requires	additional	energy	to
create	a	protective	device	until,	finally,	all	of	our	energy	is	drained	into	our
extensive	defensive	measures.	The	willingness	to	look	at	a	fear	and	work	with	it
until	we	are	free	of	it	brings	about	immediate	rewards.

Each	of	us	has	within	us	a	certain	reservoir	of	suppressed	and	repressed

fear.	This	quantity	of	fear	spills	into	all	areas	of	our	life,	colors	all	of	our
experience,	decreases	our	joy	in	life,	and	reflects	itself	in	the	musculature	of	the
face	so	as	to	affect	our	physical	appearance,	our	physical	strength,	and	the
condition	of	health	in	all	of	the	organs	in	the	body.	Sustained	and	chronic	fear
gradually	suppresses	the	body’s	immune	system.	With	kinesiologic	testing,	we
can	instantly	demonstrate	that	a	fearful	thought	causes	a	major	reduction	in
muscle	power	and	deranges	the	energy	flow	down	the	body’s	energy	meridians
to	the	body’s	vital	organs.	Although	we	know	that	it	is	totally	damaging	to	our
relationships,	health,	and	happiness,	we	still	hang	on	to	fear.	Why	is	that?
We	have	the	unconscious	fantasy	that	fear	is	keeping	us	alive;	this	is
because	fear	is	associated	with	our	whole	set	of	survival	mechanisms.	We	have
the	idea	that,	if	we	were	to	let	go	of	fear,	our	main	defense	mechanism,	we
would	become	vulnerable	in	some	way.	In	reality,	the	truth	is	just	the	opposite.
Fear	is	what	blinds	us	to	the	real	dangers	of	life.	In	fact,	fear	itself	is	the	greatest
danger	that	the	human	body	faces.	It	is	fear	and	guilt	that	bring	about	disease	and
failure	in	every	area	of	our	lives.

We	could	take	the	same	protective	actions	out	of	love	rather	than	out	of

fear.	Can	we	not	care	for	our	bodies	because	we	appreciate	and	value	them,
rather	than	out	of	fear	of	disease	and	dying?	Can	we	not	be	of	service	to	others
in	our	life	out	of	love,	rather	than	out	of	fear	of	losing	them?	Can	we	not	be
polite	and	courteous	to	strangers	because	we	care	for	our	fellow	human	beings,
rather	than	because	we	fear	losing	their	good	opinion	of	us?	Can	we	not	do	a
good	job	because	we	care	about	the	quality	of	our	performance	and	we	care
about	our	fellow	workers?	Can	we	not	perform	our	job	well	because	we	care
about	the	recipients	of	our	services,	rather	than	just	the	fear	of	losing	our	jobs	or
pursuing	our	own	ambition?	Can	we	not	accomplish	more	by	cooperation,	rather
than	by	fearful	competition?	Can	we	not	drive	carefully	because	we	have	a	high
regard	for	ourselves	and	care	for	our	welfare	and	those	who	love	us,	rather	than
because	we	fear	an	accident?	On	a	spiritual	level,	isn’t	it	more	effective	if,	out	of
compassion	and	identification	with	our	fellow	human	beings,	we	care	for	them,
rather	than	trying	to	love	them	out	of	fear	of	God’s	punishment	if	we	don’t?

Guilt
One	particular	form	of	fear	is	what	we	call	guilt.	Guilt	is	always	associated	with
a	feeling	of	wrongness	and	potential	punishment,	either	real	or	in	fantasy.	If
punishment	is	not	forthcoming	in	the	external	world,	it	expresses	itself	as	self-
punishment	on	an	emotional	level.	Guilt	accompanies	all	of	the	negative
emotions	and,	thus,	where	there	is	fear,	there	is	guilt.	If	you	think	a	guilty

thought	and	have	somebody	test	your	muscle	strength,	you	will	see	that	the
muscle	instantly	goes	weak.	Your	cerebral	hemisphere	has	become
desynchronized	and	all	of	your	energy	meridians	are	thrown	out	of	balance.
Nature,	therefore,	says	that	guilt	is	destructive.

If	guilt	is	so	destructive,	then	why	are	there	such	paeans	of	praise	allotted	to

it?	Why	do	so-called	experts	view	guilt	as	beneficial?	For	example,	a
psychiatrist	wrote	a	magazine	article	in	praise	of	guilt,	declaring:	“Guilt	is	good
for	you.”	He	then	qualified	the	statement	with	“appropriate	guilt.”	Let’s	look	at
what	guilt	is	really	all	about	and	see	if	we	agree	or	not.

When	you	cross	the	street,	you	look	both	ways	to	see	if	a	car	is	coming.
How	did	this	come	about?	When	you	were	a	child,	you	were	told	that	it	was
“bad”	to	cross	the	street.	Thus,	we	see	that	guilt	is	really	a	substitute	for	a	sense
of	reality	in	a	mind	that	is	undeveloped,	such	as	that	of	a	child.	It	is	a	learned
behavior	which	is	purportedly	pragmatic:	to	prevent	further	error	or	the
repetition	of	a	mistake.	Ninety-nine	percent	of	guilt	has	nothing	whatsoever	to
do	with	reality.	In	fact,	the	most	pious,	meek,	and	harmless	individuals	are	often
riddled	with	guilt.	Guilt	is	really	self-condemnation	and	self-invalidation	of	our
worth	and	value	as	a	human	being.

Guilt	is	as	prevalent	as	fear,	and	we	feel	guilty	no	matter	what	we	are	doing.

A	part	of	our	mind	says	that	we	really	ought	to	be	doing	something	else.	Or,
whatever	we	are	actually	doing	at	the	moment,	we	ought	to	be	doing	“better.”
We	“should”	be	getting	a	better	golf	score.	We	“should”	be	reading	a	book
instead	of	watching	television.	We	“should”	make	love	better.	Cook	better.	Run
faster.	Grow	taller.	Be	stronger.	Be	smarter.	Be	more	educated.	In	between	the
fear	of	living	and	the	fear	of	dying	is	the	guilt	of	the	moment.	We	seek	to	escape
it	by	remaining	unaware	of	it	through	suppression,	repression,	projecting	it	onto
others,	and	escapism.

Remaining	unconscious	of	guilt	(repression),	however,	does	not	solve	it.

The	guilt	re-emerges	in	the	form	of	self-punishment	and	through	accidents,
misfortune,	loss	of	jobs	and	relationships,	physical	disease	and	sickness,
tiredness,	exhaustion,	and	the	multiple	ways	the	ingenious	mind	figures	out	how
to	bring	about	the	loss	of	pleasure,	joy,	and	aliveness.

Guilt	represents	death	just	as	love	represents	life.	Guilt	is	part	of	the	smaller
self	and	underlies	our	willingness	to	believe	negative	things	about	ourselves.	The
happiness	and	joy	of	the	day	is	instantly	destroyed	by	one	negative	remark	from
a	family	member,	friend,	or	neighbor.	Physical	disease	is	unlikely	to	exist
without	guilt,	and	guilt	is	a	denial	of	our	inner	intrinsic	innocence.

Why	do	we	buy	into	so	much	garbage?	Is	it	not	because	of	our	very
innocence?	Is	it	not	because,	as	we	grew	up,	we	trusted	that	what	others	were

telling	us	was	the	truth?	And	even	currently,	do	we	still	trust	what	others	are
telling	us	is	the	truth?	Is	it	not	so	that	we	have	bought	into	ten	thousand	lies	and
are	willing	to	buy	another	ten	thousand	out	of	the	naïveté	of	our	inner
innocence?	Is	not	that	inner	innocence	the	very	reason	for	our	exploitability?	In
fact,	when	we	look	deep	within	ourselves,	is	it	not	because	of	our	very	innocence
that	we	believe	ourselves	to	be	guilty?

It	is	because	of	our	own	inner	innocence	that	we	have	bought	into	all	the

negativity	of	the	world	and	allowed	it	to	kill	our	aliveness,	destroy	our
awareness	of	who	we	really	are,	and	sell	us	the	pathetic	little	smallness	for
which	we	have	settled.	Is	not	ours	the	innocence	of	the	newborn	that	cannot
defend	itself	and,	with	no	capacity	for	discernment,	could	only	allow	itself	to	be
programmed,	like	a	computer?

To	see	this	means	to	become	conscious.	We	hear	of	consciousness-raising
programs	and	weekend	seminars	to	expand	our	consciousness.	What	does	this
mean?	To	get	some	new	complicated	formulas?	To	get	programmed	with
somebody	else’s	idea	of	mystical	truth?

Most	of	the	consciousness	programs	boil	down	to	this	essential	point:
become	aware	of	what	we	are	buying	into,	what	we	are	accepting	daily.	Let’s
look	at	what	we	have	already	been	programmed	with	and	begin	to	question	it,
disassemble	it,	and	let	it	go.	Let’s	wake	up	and	free	ourselves	from	being
exploited	and	enslaved	by	the	negative	programming	of	the	world.	We	will	see	it
for	what	it	is,	which	is	an	attempt	by	others	to	control	us;	exploit	us;	extract	our
money,	our	services,	our	energy,	our	loyalties;	and	capture	our	mind.	The
mechanisms	whereby	this	comes	about	were	so	beautifully	exemplified	in	the
movie,	Tron,	in	which	the	very	function	of	“master	control”	was	to	enslave	by
progressive	programming.

When	we	see	the	truth	of	how	programming	happens,	we	will	see	that	we

are	the	pure,	blank	computer.	We	are	the	innocent	space	in	which	the
programming	is	occurring.	When	we	look	at	all	of	this,	we	are	going	to	get
angry.	Anger	is	better	than	resignation,	apathy,	depression,	and	grief!	It	means	to
take	charge	of	our	mind	instead	of	handing	it	to	the	television	set,	the	newspaper,
the	magazines,	the	neighbors,	the	conversations	in	the	subway,	the	chance
remarks	of	the	waitress,	the	garbage	in	and	the	garbage	out.	What	went	into	our
memory	banks	was	garbage,	and	when	we	see	this,	we	will	have	much	less	fear.
We	will	enjoy	starting	to	let	the	feelings	come	up,	seeing	them	for	what	they	are,
clearing	out	all	of	the	garbage,	and	letting	it	all	go.

Once	we	have	looked	deep	within	ourselves	and	found	that	innate	inner

innocence,	we	will	stop	hating	ourselves.	We	will	stop	condemning	ourselves
and	stop	buying	into	the	condemnation	of	others	and	their	subtle	attempts	to

invalidate	our	worth	as	human	beings.	It’s	time	to	re-own	our	own	power	and
stop	giving	it	away	to	every	passing	scammer	who	jiggles	our	fears	and	shakes
loose	some	money	out	of	our	pocketbook	or	enslaves	us	to	their	cause,	living	off
of	our	energy.	It’s	easy	to	get	away	from	all	that	fear	because	we	have	the	power
of	choice	now.

We	fear	that	the	inner	voyage	of	discovery	will	lead	us	to	some	dreadful,

awful	truth.	In	its	programming	of	our	minds,	this	is	one	of	the	barriers	that	the
world	has	set	up	to	prevent	us	from	finding	out	the	real	truth.	There	is	one	thing
the	world	does	not	want	us	to	find	out	and	that	is	the	truth	about	ourselves.
Why?	Because	then	we	will	become	free.	We	can	no	longer	be	controlled,
manipulated,	exploited,	drained,	enslaved,	imprisoned,	vilified,	or
disempowered.	Therefore,	the	inner	voyage	of	discovery	is	cloaked	over	with	an
aura	of	mystery	and	foreboding.

What	is	the	real	truth	about	this	voyage?	The	real	truth	is	that,	as	we	go

within	and	discard	one	illusion	after	another,	one	falsehood	after	another,	one
negative	program	after	another,	it	gets	lighter	and	lighter.	The	awareness	of	the
presence	of	love	becomes	stronger	and	stronger.	We	will	feel	lighter	and	lighter.
Life	becomes	progressively	more	effortless.

Every	great	teacher	since	the	beginning	of	time	has	said	to	look	within	and
find	the	truth,	for	the	truth	of	what	we	really	are	will	set	us	free.	If	what	is	to	be
found	within	ourselves	were	something	to	feel	guilty	about,	something	that	is
rotten,	evil	and	negative,	then	all	the	world’s	great	teachers	would	not	advise	us
to	look	there.	On	the	contrary,	they	would	tell	us	to	avoid	it	at	all	costs.	We	will
discover	that	all	of	the	things	the	world	calls	“evil”	are	right	on	the	surface;	they
are	right	on	the	top,	as	the	superficial,	outer	thin	layer.	Beneath	these	errors	is
mistakenness.	We	are	not	rotten—only	ignorant.

As	the	quantity	of	guilty	fear	and	the	energy	accompanying	it	are
relinquished,	we	will	notice	that	physical	diseases	and	symptoms	begin	to
disappear.	The	capacity	to	love	ourselves	in	the	form	of	increased	self-esteem
returns	and	with	it	comes	the	capacity	to	love	others.	Being	freed	from	guilt
brings	about	a	renewal	of	life	energy.	This	can	be	dramatically	witnessed	in
many	people	who	are	converted	through	religious	experience.	The	sudden
freedom	from	guilt	through	the	mechanism	of	forgiveness	is	responsible	for
thousands	of	recoveries	from	serious	and	advanced	diseases.	Whether	or	not	we
agree	with	their	religious	concept	is	immaterial.	What	is	important	to	notice	is
that	the	alleviation	of	guilt	is	accompanied	by	a	resurgence	of	life	energy,	well-
being,	and	physical	health.

When	it	comes	to	healing	ourselves	and	increasing	our	own	emotional
health,	it	“pays	to	be	paranoid.”	We	become	aware	of	all	the	guilt-mongers	in

our	life	and	their	deleterious	influences.

We	can	ask	ourselves,	could	we	not	achieve	the	same	motivation	or

behavior	out	of	love	rather	than	out	of	fear	and	guilt?	Is	guilt	the	only	reason	we
don’t	stab	our	neighbor?	Why	couldn’t	it	be	that	we	would	refuse	to	stab	our
neighbor	because	we	love	and	care	for	him	as	a	fellow	human	being	who	is
intrinsically	innocent	and	who	is	struggling	to	grow,	but	may	make	mistakes
along	the	way	just	as	we,	ourselves,	have	done?	Would	not	following	religious
teachings,	whatever	they	are,	be	more	effective	if	done	out	of	love	and
appreciation,	rather	than	out	of	guilt	and	fear?	We	can	ask	ourselves,	what	do	we
really	need	guilt	for	anyway?	What	possible	service	do	we	get	out	of	it?	Are	we
so	miserably	stupid	that	we	behave	only	out	of	guilt?	Are	we	so	unconscious?
Cannot	consideration	for	the	feelings	of	others	replace	guilt	as	a	motivation	for
appropriate	human	behavior?

As	we	examine	these	issues	and	look	at	their	social	origins,	we	see	that	the
Middle	Ages	are	far	from	over.	The	Inquisition	has	merely	taken	on	newer	and
subtler	forms	of	cruelty.	We	have	unwittingly	bought	into	a	system	of	negativity
that	is	currently	running	the	planet.	To	make	wrong	and	to	make	guilty	is	really	a
form	of	cruelty,	is	it	not?	We	have	allowed	others	to	program	us	with	methods	of
self-torture,	and	we	can	see	that	we	have	retaliated	by	inviting	others	to	torture
themselves	in	return.	We	have	allowed	ourselves	to	be	manipulated	by	guilt,	and
we	turn	it	around	and	use	that	same	mechanism	of	guilt	to	try	to	exploit	and
control	others.

The	degree	to	which	we	have	not	allowed	ourselves	to	experience	the	reality
of	our	true	Self	is	represented	by	our	resentment	toward	those	who	have	actually
done	so.	We	resent	their	aliveness	in	the	areas	in	which	we	feel	disabled.	This
sobering	truth	is	represented	by	the	story	of	the	man	who	walks	along	the	beach
and	comes	upon	a	fisherman	with	a	pail	full	of	crabs.	He	says	to	the	fisherman,
“You’d	better	put	a	cover	on	that	pail	or	the	crabs	will	get	out.”	“Well,	no,”	said
the	wise	old	fisherman.	“There	is	no	need	for	that.	You	see,	as	one	crab	crawls
up	the	side	of	the	pail	to	get	out,	the	other	crabs	reach	up	and	grab	him	and	pull
him	back	down.	So	there’s	no	need	for	a	cover.”

As	we	keep	letting	go,	getting	lighter,	and	becoming	freer,	we	will,
unfortunately,	see	that	the	nature	of	the	world	is	like	that	pail	of	crabs.	And,
then,	the	full	extent	of	its	negativity	becomes	apparent.	When	we	become	totally
aware	of	the	bill	of	goods	that	we	have	been	sold,	it	is	very	likely	that	we	will
feel	anger	and	a	strong	desire	to	become	liberated	from	the	constraints	of
negativity.

CHAPTER

7

DESIRE

This	emotion	may	range	from	a	mild	wanting	to	an	obsessive,	driven	craving	for
something	or	someone.	It	is	also	expressed	as	greed,	obsession,	hunger,	envy,
jealousy,	clinging,	hoarding,	ruthlessness,	fixation,	frenzy,	exaggeration,	over-
ambition,	selfishness,	lust,	possessiveness,	control,	glamorization,	insatiability,
and	acquisitiveness.	“Never	satisfied.”	“Never	enough.”	“Must	have.”	The
underlying	quality	of	this	emotion	is	its	drivenness.	When	we	are	at	the	effect	of
desire,	we	are	no	longer	free.	We	are	controlled	by	it,	run	by	it,	enslaved	and	led
about	by	the	nose	by	it.

Here	again,	the	essential	point	of	freedom	is	whether	we	have	chosen
consciously	to	fulfill	a	certain	want,	or	whether	we	are	just	being	blindly	run	by
unconscious	programs	and	belief	systems.

Desire	as	an	Obstacle
There	is	often	a	lack	of	understanding	of	the	function	of	wanting	and	desire.	The
main	illusion	is	seen	in	the	statement,	“The	only	way	that	I’ll	get	what	I	want	is
by	desiring	it;	if	I	let	go	of	my	desire,	then	I	won’t	get	what	I	want.”	Actually,
the	opposite	is	true.	Desire,	especially	strong	desire	(e.g.,	cravingness),
frequently	blocks	our	getting	what	we	want.

Why	is	this	so?	Actually,	the	way	something	comes	into	our	life	is	because

we	have	chosen	it.	It	was	the	result	of	our	intention,	or	we	made	a	decision	for	it.
It	has	come	into	our	life	in	spite	of	desire.	The	desiring	was	actually	the	obstacle
to	its	achievement	or	acquisition.	This	is	because	desire	literally	means,	“I	do	not
have.”	In	other	words,	if	we	say	that	we	desire	something,	we	are	saying	that	it

	
isn’t	ours.	When	we	say	that	it	isn’t	ours,	we	put	a	psychic	distance	between
ourselves	and	what	we	want.	This	distance	becomes	the	obstacle	that	consumes
energy.

The	impossible	becomes	possible	as	soon	as	we	are	totally	surrendered.	This

is	because	wanting	blocks	receiving	it	and	results	in	a	fear	of	not	getting	it.	The
energy	of	desire	is,	in	essence,	a	denial	that	what	we	want	is	ours	for	the	asking.
This	is	a	different	way	of	looking	at	achieving	goals	than	the	one	we	are
used	to	from	the	programming	of	our	world.	We	are	used	to	picturing	ambition
and	success	as	being	associated	with	hard	work	and	the	classical	“Protestant
ethic”	virtues.	These	include	self-sacrifice,	asceticism,	great	expenditure	of
effort	and	endeavor,	keeping	our	nose	to	the	grindstone,	tightening	our	belt,
buckling	down,	and	all	the	grimness	of	hard	work.	When	we	look	at	this	whole
picture,	it	sounds	arduous,	doesn’t	it?	Well,	it	is.	It	involves	struggle,	and	the
struggle	results	from	the	block	we	have	put	in	our	own	way	because	of	desire.

Let’s	compare	the	arduous	lower	consciousness	way	of	achieving	goals	with
a	higher	state	of	consciousness	in	which	we	have	acknowledged	and	let	go	of	the
desire,	and	are	in	a	freer	state.	In	a	freer	state,	that	which	is	chosen	manifests	in
our	life	effortlessly.	We	surrender	the	emotion	of	desire	and,	instead,	merely
choose	the	goal,	picture	it	lovingly,	and	allow	it	to	happen	because	we	see	that	it
is	already	ours.

Why	is	it	already	ours?	In	a	lower	state	of	consciousness,	the	universe	is
seen	as	negative	and	denying,	frustrating,	and	reluctant.	It	is	like	a	bad,	stingy
parent.	In	a	higher	state	of	consciousness,	our	experience	of	the	universe
changes.	It	now	becomes	like	a	giving,	loving,	unconditionally	approving	parent
who	wants	us	to	have	everything	we	want,	and	it	is	ours	for	the	asking.	This	is
creating	a	different	context.	It	is	giving	the	universe	a	different	meaning.

Although	the	world	may	be	stingy	and	hostile	to	other	people,	there	is	no

reason	why	we	should	buy	into	this	paradigm.	When	we	buy	into	it,	we	make	it
that	way	in	our	own	life.	As	we	experience	the	letting	go	of	desires,	we	begin	to
see	that	what	we	have	chosen	will	come	into	our	life	almost	magically.	“What
we	hold	in	mind	tends	to	manifest.”	As	was	said	before,	during	times	of
supposed	high	unemployment,	some	people	are	not	only	employed	but	have	two
or	three	jobs.

This	was	a	shockingly	new	way	of	looking	at	the	world	when	it	was	first
encountered.	There	was	the	hope	that	it	was	true,	but	also	a	skepticism	that	said,
“This	just	isn’t	possible	on	a	pragmatic	level.”	A	strict	“Protestant	ethic”
background	made	it	hard	to	believe;	nonetheless,	the	willingness	was	there	to	be
open-minded	enough	to	give	it	a	try.	Here	was	the	initial	experience	with	letting
go	of	desire.

Personal	goals	were	written	down,	followed	by	a	letting	go	of	the	desire	for
them.	It	sounds	paradoxical	but	that	is	the	process:	identify	the	goals	and	then	let
go	of	wanting	them.	One	goal	that	had	been	held	in	mind	for	several	years	was
an	apartment	in	New	York	City,	because	work	commitments	required	a	lot	of
commuting	and	money	spent	on	hotel	rooms.	A	small	apartment	in	the	city—a
so-called	pied-à-terre—would	be	the	economical	solution.	“Apartment	in	New
York	City”	was	written	down	as	a	goal.	When	utilizing	this	way	of	achieving
goals,	we	include	all	of	the	details,	as	impossible	as	they	may	seem	to	the
rational	mind	to	achieve.	So,	the	ideal	apartment	was	detailed:	reasonably	priced,
on	Fifth	Avenue	in	the	70s	block,	right	next	to	an	entrance	to	Central	Park,	at
least	eight	or	nine	floors	up	and	in	the	rear	so	that	the	street	noise	would	be
minimized,	and	not	any	bigger	than	about	two	and	a	half	rooms.

The	next	day	at	work,	it	was	busy	as	usual,	with	a	big	caseload,	meetings,

and	patient	visits.	In	between	the	meetings	and	patients,	the	feeling	of
wantingness	for	the	apartment	would	be	acknowledged	and	let	go.	And,	as	the
day	progressed,	the	apartment	was	actually	forgotten.	At	4:30	P.M.,	after	the	last
patient,	there	was	suddenly	the	impulse	to	drive	into	the	city.	Despite	the	fact
that	it	was	ostensibly	rush	hour,	the	road	was	clear	and	the	drive	took	only	half
an	hour.	The	car	cruised	to	about	73rd	and	Lexington,	pulling	up	to	the	nearest
real	estate	office.	Rather	magically,	there	happened	to	be	a	parking	space	open
right	in	front	of	the	real	estate	office.	The	real	estate	officer,	upon	hearing	the
tongue-in-cheek	announcement	that	an	apartment	on	Fifth	Avenue	was	desired,
looked	with	surprise	and	said,	“Well,	you	are	certainly	in	luck!	Exactly	one	hour
ago	we	listed	the	only	apartment	for	rent	on	all	of	Fifth	Avenue,	at	76th	Street,
on	the	ninth	floor.	It’s	the	rear	apartment,	two	and	a	half	rooms,	and	the	rent	is
reasonable	(rent-controlled	at	$500.00	a	month).	It	has	just	been	painted	and	you
can	move	in	any	time.”	So	we	walked	over	and	viewed	the	apartment.	It	fit	the
description	of	the	goal	exactly.	The	lease	was	signed	on	the	spot!	Thus,	within
24	hours	of	trying	the	letting	go	technique	on	a	specific	personal	goal,	the	goal
was	a	reality.	It	had	been	something	that	was	almost	impossible	to	find,	and	yet
it	happened	exactly	as	pictured,	effortlessly,	and	with	no	negative	emotions.	It
was	an	easy	and	joyous	experience.

This	is	not	an	unusual	experience	but	a	typical	one,	because	in	this	case	the
desire	was	moderate	and	could,	without	much	effort,	be	totally	surrendered.	By
being	totally	surrendered,	this	means	that	it	was	okay	if	the	apartment	happened,
and	it	was	okay	if	it	didn’t.	Because	of	being	totally	surrendered,	the	impossible
became	possible,	manifesting	itself	effortlessly	and	rapidly.

We	can	all	doubt	this	mechanism	and	look	back	at	things	that	we	wanted
and	that	were	achieved	through	ambition,	desire,	craving,	and	even	obsessive,

frenzied	wanting.	The	mind	says,	“Well,	what	if	I	had	let	go	of	the	desire	for
those	things?	If	it	weren’t	for	the	desire,	how	would	I	have	gotten	them?”	The
truth	is,	we	could	have	gotten	them	anyway,	only	without	anxiety	(fear	of	not
getting),	without	all	the	energy	expenditure,	without	all	the	effort,	without	all	the
trial	and	error,	and	without	all	the	hard	work.

“Well!”	the	mind	says,	“if	we	got	it	effortlessly,	how	about	the	pride	of
achievement?	Wouldn’t	we	have	to	sacrifice	that?”	Well,	yes,	we	would	have	to
relinquish	the	vanity	of	all	that	sacrifice	and	hard	work	that	we	put	into	it.	We
would	have	to	give	up	the	sentimentality	about	the	self-sacrifice	and	all	the	pain
and	suffering	we	went	through	to	achieve	our	goals.	This	is	a	peculiar	perversion
in	our	society,	isn’t	it?	If	we	suddenly	become	successful	almost	effortlessly,
then	people	are	envious.	It	really	annoys	them	that	we	didn’t	have	to	go	through
all	kinds	of	anguish,	pain,	and	suffering	to	get	there.	Their	mind	believes	that
such	anguish	is	the	cost	that	must	be	paid	for	success.

Let’s	look	at	this	belief.	If	it	weren’t	for	the	negative	programming	that
made	us	believe	otherwise,	why	should	we	go	through	any	cost	of	pain	and
suffering	to	achieve	anything	in	our	life?	Isn’t	that	a	rather	sadistic	view	of	the
world	and	the	universe?

Other	blocks	to	the	achievement	of	our	wants	and	desires,	of	course,	are
unconscious	guilt	and	smallness.	Peculiarly,	the	unconscious	will	allow	us	to
have	only	what	we	think	we	deserve.	The	more	we	hang	on	to	our	negativity	and
the	small	self-image	that	results,	the	less	we	think	we	deserve,	and	we
unconsciously	deny	ourselves	the	abundance	which	flows	so	easily	to	others.
That	is	the	reason	for	the	saying,	“The	poor	get	poorer	and	the	rich	get	richer.”	If
we	have	a	small	view	of	ourselves,	then	what	we	deserve	is	poverty,	and	our
unconscious	will	see	to	it	that	we	have	that	actuality.	As	we	relinquish	our
smallness	and	revalidate	our	own	inner	innocence,	and	as	we	let	go	of	resisting
our	generosity,	openness,	trust,	lovingness,	and	faith,	then	the	unconscious	will
automatically	start	arranging	life	circumstances	so	that	abundance	begins	to	flow
into	our	life.

Having—Doing—Being
As	we	free	ourselves	out	of	lower	states	of	consciousness	such	as	apathy	and
fear,	we	come	into	wantingness.	What	was	formerly	an	“I	can’t”	and	impossible
now	becomes	possible.	The	general	progression	of	the	levels	of	consciousness,
as	we	go	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest,	is	to	move	from	havingness	to	doingness
to	beingness.	At	the	lower	levels	of	consciousness,	it	is	what	we	have	that
counts.	It	is	what	we	have	that	we	want.	It	is	what	we	have	that	we	value.	It	is
what	we	have	that	gives	us	our	self-image	of	worth	and	position	in	the	world.

Once	we	have	proven	to	ourselves	that	we	can	have,	that	our	basic	needs
can	be	fulfilled,	that	we	have	the	power	to	provide	for	our	own	needs	and	those
of	others	who	are	dependent	upon	us,	the	mind	begins	to	become	more	interested
in	what	it	is	that	we	do.	Then,	we	move	to	a	different	social	set	in	which	what	we
do	in	the	world	is	the	basis	of	our	value	and	how	others	rate	us.	As	we	move	up
in	lovingness,	our	doingness	is	less	and	less	preoccupied	with	self-service	and
becomes	more	and	more	oriented	to	being	of	service	to	others.	As	our
consciousness	grows,	we	see	that	service,	which	is	lovingly	oriented	toward
others,	automatically	results	in	the	fulfillment	of	our	own	needs.	(This	does	not
mean	sacrifice.	Service	is	not	sacrifice.)	Eventually,	we	become	convinced	that
our	own	needs	are	automatically	fulfilled	by	the	universe,	and	our	actions
become	almost	automatically	loving.

At	that	point,	it	is	no	longer	what	we	do	in	the	world	but	what	we	are	that
counts.	We	have	proven	to	ourselves	that	we	can	have	what	we	need,	that	we	can
do	almost	anything,	given	the	willingness.	And	now	what	we	are,	within
ourselves	and	to	others,	becomes	most	important.	People	now	seek	our	company,
not	because	of	what	we	have,	not	because	of	what	we	do	and	society’s	labels,
but	because	of	what	we	have	become.	Because	of	the	quality	of	our	presence,
people	just	want	to	be	around	us	and	experience	us.	Our	social	description
changes.	We	are	no	longer	the	person	who	has	a	fashionable	apartment	or	big	car
or	a	bric-a-brac	collection,	nor	are	we	labeled	as	the	President	of	the	So-and-So
Corporation	or	a	member	of	the	Board	of	Directors	of	some	organization.	Now
we	are	described	as	a	splendid	person,	as	somebody	whom	people	just	have	to
meet,	just	have	to	know.	We	become	described	as	a	charismatic	person.

This	level	of	beingness	is	typical	of	self-help	groups.	In	self-help	groups,	no
one	is	interested	in	what	others	do	in	the	world	or	what	they	have.	They	are	only
interested	in	whether	or	not	we	have	achieved	certain	inner	goals,	such	as	those
of	honesty,	openness,	sharingness,	lovingness,	willingness	to	help,	humility,
genuineness,	and	awareness.	They	are	interested	in	our	quality	of	beingness.

Glamour
Glamour	is	a	very	useful	subject	to	understand.	Once	we	understand	it,	it	greatly
facilitates	the	letting	go	of	desires.	The	book	called	Glamour:	A	World	Problem
(1950),	by	Alice	Bailey,	presents	the	whole	subject	expertly.

If	we	look	at	something	that	we	want,	we	can	begin	to	distinguish	between
the	thing	itself	versus	the	aura,	patina,	flash,	and	attractive	magnetic	effect	of	a
quality	that	can	best	be	described	as	“glamour.”	It	is	this	disparity	between	what
a	thing	is	in	itself,	and	the	glamour	that	we	have	attached	to	it,	which	leads	to
disillusionment.	So	often	we	have	chased	some	goal	and,	then,	when	we	have

achieved	it,	we	are	disappointed.	That	is	because	the	thing	itself	does	not
coincide	with	our	pictures	of	it.	Glamour	means	that	we	have	attached
sentimentality	or	we	have	made	it	bigger	than	life.	We	have	projected	onto	a
thing	a	magical	quality	that	somehow	leads	us	to	believe	that,	once	we	acquire	it,
we	will	magically	achieve	some	higher	state	of	happiness	and	satisfaction.

This	happens	very	often	with	vocational	goals.	The	man	works	year	after

year	striving	to	become	president	of	the	company	or	become	important	and
prominent	in	some	other	way.	When	he	gets	there,	he	expects	to	experience	all
the	satisfaction	and	the	glamour	associated	with	that	level	of	achievement:	the
kowtowing	by	employees,	the	flashy	cars,	the	prominent	office,	the	labels,	the
titles,	and	the	exclusive	addresses.	But	what	he	finds	is	that	all	of	these	things
are	superficial.	They	are	very	inadequate	compensation	for	the	agonizing	energy
drain	and	daily	grind	that,	in	reality,	the	position	necessitates.	While	he	pictured
that	he	would	get	admiration,	what	he	often	finds	at	the	top	levels	is	viciousness,
competitiveness,	envy,	and	the	endless	fawning	and	dishonest	manipulations	that
occur	to	people	in	power,	including	the	paranoid	attacks	by	competitors.	He
finds	that	his	energy	is	so	drained	that	he	has	no	energy	left	over	for	his	personal
life;	his	relationships	are	impaired.	His	wife	complains	that	he	is	too	exhausted
to	make	love,	too	depleted	to	give	her	the	energy	she	needs,	too	worn-out	to	be	a
good	father,	and	too	tired	even	to	enjoy	a	favorite	recreational	activity.

The	same	thing	occurs	with	women	in	the	traditionally	feminine	areas	of

achievement.	A	woman	thinks,	for	instance,	if	she	gets	a	certain	designer	dress
for	the	party	that	the	dress	is	going	to	bring	her	attention,	adulation,	and
admiration,	and	that	it	will	win	her	a	certain	social	status.	With	much	sacrifice,
she	spends	a	great	deal	of	money	and	effort	on	the	dress,	running	back	and	forth
for	fittings.	But	what	happens?	At	the	dinner	party,	there	are	a	few	passing
comments	on	her	dress	and	that’s	the	end	of	it.	Nobody	dances	with	her	any
more	than	usual.	She	is	not	more	prominent	than	she	was	before	the	party.	No
more	genuine	attention	is	paid	to	her	than	previously.	She	gets	some	hostile,
envious	looks	from	other	women	who	recognize	what	she	probably	paid	for	the
dress.	During	the	evening,	she	has	the	usual	argument	with	her	escort,	and	they
go	home	in	the	car	barely	speaking	to	each	other,	the	same	as	in	the	past.

As	women	make	gains	in	the	corporate	and	political	arenas,	they	face	the
disappointment	that	accompanies	longed-for,	glamorized	leadership	roles	in	the
public.	What	was	predicted	to	enhance	prestige	and	esteem	instead	brings
criticism,	envy,	and	hostility—even	from	other	women.	The	experience	of
achieving	their	goal	is	often	not	what	they	thought	it	was	going	to	be.	There	is
endless	judgment	of	a	woman’s	public	persona	and	dress,	and	she	may	have	the
gnawing	feeling	of	inner	worry	that	she	has	failed	her	family	by	going	for

professional	fulfillment.	“Winning”	is	sometimes	not	as	liberating	as	glamour
would	want	us	to	believe.

Emotional	goals	are	also	glamorized	by	sentimentality	and	emotionalism.	A

certain	excitement	is	projected	onto	the	emotional	event	(e.g.,	a	reunion,	a	first
date,	or	being	elected	president	of	one’s	class).	It	is	made	to	seem	more
important	than	it	really	is	in	the	overall	course	of	events.	After	the	event	passes,
life	goes	on	the	same	and	disappointment	ensues.

Glamorization,	of	course,	is	starkly	obvious	in	advertising.	Here	we	see	it

sui	generis.	The	cowboy	is	the	glamorization	of	masculinity,	and	the	ballet
dancer	is	the	glamorization	of	femininity.	Men	are	attracted	by	personality,	not
the	brand;	thus,	the	cowboy	represents	the	glamorized	male	who	is	rugged,	cool,
suave,	and	in	control.	The	consumer	projects	onto	the	product	that	it	will	give
him	those	desired	personality	traits.

Glamorization	is	living	at	a	fantasy	level.	Therefore,	when	we	proceed	to	let

go	of	a	desire,	we	must	dissect	away	that	which	is	exaggeration,	fantasy,	and
romanticization.	Once	we	have	relinquished	the	glamour,	it	will	be	relatively
easy	to	surrender	the	desire	itself.	If	you	let	go	of	the	romanticization	of	the
cowboy,	for	example,	then	the	cigarette	or	the	cheeseburger	that	he	was	handling
in	the	commercial	will	lose	its	appeal.	In	fact,	much	to	our	surprise,	we	will	find
over	and	over	again	that	the	desire	was	attached	to	the	glamorous	fantasy;	there
was	no	reality	in	it	in	the	first	place.	Because	there	was	no	reality	in	it,	the	world
is	constantly	selling	us	dishonesty,	catering	to	our	desire	for	that	romantic,
glamorized	aspect.	It	promises	to	make	us	more	important	than	we	really	are.
Glamour	at	that	level	of	dishonesty	is	a	fake.

The	mind	protests:	“Do	I	have	to	give	up	all	that	glamorous	excitement?	Do

I	have	to	let	go	of	my	pictures	of	emotional	gratification	and	excitement?”	The
answer	is	obviously	“No.”	We	don’t	have	to	give	them	up	at	all.	And	we	can
achieve	the	goals	effortlessly	and	easily	once	we	are	conscious	of	what	we	are
choosing.	We	can	have	them	directly.	We	can	be	attractive,	but	we	won’t	get	it
in	a	fake	way	such	as	driving	a	certain	style	of	car.	We	will	get	it	by	letting	go	of
our	smallness	and	owning	our	greatness,	thereby	reflecting	it	out	into	the	world.
We	can	easily	become	that	exciting	person	whom	people	are	eager	to	know.	Just
choose	to	be	that	person	and	let	go	of	the	block	of	desiring	to	be	that	way.	We
can	have	what	we	want	directly	without	detouring	through	some	fraudulent
promise	that	will	lead	us	into	frustration	and	disappointment.

The	way	to	become	that	exciting	person	whom	people	want	to	know	is	very

easy.	We	simply	picture	the	kind	of	person	we	want	to	be	and	surrender	all	the
negative	feelings	and	blocks	that	prevent	us	from	being	that.	What	happens,
then,	is	that	all	we	need	to	have	and	to	do	will	automatically	fall	into	place.	This

is	because,	in	contrast	to	having	and	doing,	the	level	of	being	has	the	most
power	and	energy.	When	it	is	given	priority,	it	automatically	integrates	and
organizes	one’s	activities.	This	mechanism	is	evidenced	in	the	common
experience,	“What	we	hold	in	mind	tends	to	manifest.”

The	Power	of	Inner	Decision
These	are	not	philosophical	positions	but	practical	processes	that	can	be	proven
through	experience.	It	is	easy	to	experiment	with	these	concepts	and	watch	the
automatic	results	take	place.	Because	of	the	mind’s	tendency	to	want	to	attribute
credit	elsewhere,	other	than	to	the	power	of	our	own	consciousness,	it	is	good	to
keep	a	diary	to	write	down	goals	that	we	would	really	like	to	achieve	and	then
check	them	off	and	make	follow-up	notes.	Why?	Because	it	will	take	a	while
before	we	believe	that	it	is	truly	our	own	power	that	is	accomplishing	these	ends.
Here	is	an	interesting	example	of	the	denial	of	inner	power.	A	man,	who

was	desperate	for	a	job	and	pretty	frantic	about	it,	was	instructed	on	how	to
apply	the	letting	go	technique	to	his	job	situation.	Because	he	was	of	a	religious
nature,	he	was	advised	to	forget	about	getting	a	job,	to	turn	it	over	to	God,	and	to
surrender	his	desire	in	the	matter	while	staying	open	to	what	might	happen.	A
week	later,	he	recounted:	“Well,	the	day	after	I	surrendered	wanting	a	job,
nothing	happened.	Then	I	got	a	long-distance	phone	call	from	my	brother-in-
law,	and	I	am	going	to	be	joining	his	firm.	If	it	weren’t	for	my	brother-in-law,	I
never	would	have	gotten	a	job.	It’s	a	good	thing	I	didn’t	wait	for	God!”

This	is	a	good	example	of	what	the	mind	has	a	tendency	to	do.	It	was	his
own	surrender,	of	course,	that	brought	in	the	call	from	his	brother-in-law.	He	so
frantically	desired	the	job	that	the	desire	was	blocking	the	fulfillment	of	that
goal.	When	he	let	go	of	wanting	a	job,	it	quickly	appeared	within	24	hours.	But
the	propensity	of	the	mind	is	to	disown	one’s	own	power	and	project	it
elsewhere	onto	the	world.	This	is	why	people	in	their	own	estimation	think	they
are	powerless.	They	have	the	power,	but	they	have	merely	projected	it	onto
external	forces.	We	are	all	powerful	beings	who	have	become	unconscious	of
our	own	power;	we	have	denied	and	projected	it	onto	others	out	of	guilt	and	our
own	sense	of	smallness.

The	majority	of	what	happens	in	our	lifetime	is	the	result	of	some	decision

we	have	made	somewhere	in	the	past,	either	consciously	or	unconsciously.
Because	this	is	so,	it	is	very	simple,	then,	to	see	our	past	decisions	by	looking	at
our	life	and	tracking	backwards.

This	principle	is	demonstrated	by	a	woman	who	came	for	psychotherapy.
She	needed	treatment	because,	in	her	words,	“My	relationships	never	work	out.”
She	had	one	unsatisfactory	love	affair	after	another	and	was	always	left	feeling

used	and	abused.	She	was	full	of	resentment,	self-pity,	and	depression.	The
problem,	of	course,	was	given	in	her	opening	sentence,	“My	relationships	never
work	out.”

Because	we	deny	the	power	of	our	own	mind,	we	don’t	see	the	glaringly

obvious.	It	is	very	curious	how	we	have	become	so	unaware.	Here	is	a	woman
who	has	the	answer	sitting	right	there,	but	she	does	not	see	that	it	is	the	answer.
She	really	doesn’t	see	the	power	of	her	own	belief	system.	Our	mind	is	so
powerful	that,	if	we	hold	in	mind	a	single	thought	such	as,	“My	relationships
never	work	out,”	then	that	is	most	likely	going	to	happen	in	our	life.	Our
unconscious	genie,	which	can	only	take	orders	and	not	make	decisions,	sees	to	it
that	our	relationships	don’t	work	out.

Of	course,	she	got	a	lot	of	payoffs	from	her	disappointing	relationship
history.	She	got	to	experience	self-pity,	resentment,	jealousy,	envy,	and	all	those
gratifications	that	the	small	self	feeds	on	endlessly.	If	we	look	at	the	small	part
of	ourselves,	we	will	see	that	this	is	the	kind	of	thing	in	which	it	just	loves	to
wallow.	The	small	self	glorifies	in	how	miserable	life	is,	how	tough	luck	is,	how
rotten	our	experiences	have	been	and	how	mean	people	have	been	to	us.	But	we
pay	a	big	price	when	we	listen	to	this	set	of	programs.

The	corollary	is	obviously	true.	If	our	mind,	by	its	decision,	has	the	power

to	make	negative	things	happen	in	our	life,	then	it	has	equal	power	in	the
opposite,	positive	direction.	We	can	choose	all	over	again.	This	time	we	can
choose	the	positive.	We	can	cancel	the	old	programs,	and	we	can	do	that	by
beginning	to	relinquish	the	gratification	we	were	getting	out	of	the	negative
payoffs.

Now	that	we	have	looked	at	the	subject	a	bit,	we	can	come	up	with	the	term
that	most	aptly	describes	this	set	of	emotions:	“selfishness.”	The	mere	use	of	the
word	instantly	sets	up	a	resistance	due	to	guilt.	We	all	feel	guilty	because	of
selfishness.	This	puts	us	in	an	impossible	position	because,	in	order	to	carry	out
what	the	world	has	taught	us,	we	have	to	indulge	in	the	very	thing	for	which	it
then	condemns	us:	selfishness.	To	look	at	the	subject,	let’s	first	make	a	decision
that	we	are	not	going	to	beat	ourselves	up	about	it	and	get	into	the	self-
indulgence	of	guilt.	That’s	what	guilt	is,	really,	isn’t	it?	Self-indulgence.
Instead,	let’s	look	at	the	term	“selfishness”	as	merely	describing	the
collective	motivations	and	modes	of	operation	of	the	small	self	that	is	a	genetic
aspect	of	the	mind	which,	due	to	our	own	naïveté,	we	allowed	ourselves	to	be
programmed	with,	and	which	we	are	now	resolved	to	de-program	in	reverse,	like
the	“uninstall”	command	on	a	computer.

The	reason	to	let	go	of	selfishness	is	not	because	of	guilt.	Not	because	it’s	a

“sin.”	Not	because	it’s	“wrong.”	All	such	motivations	come	from	lower

consciousness	and	self-judgment.	Rather,	the	reason	to	let	go	of	selfishness	is
simply	because	it	is	impractical.	It	doesn’t	work.	It’s	too	costly.	It	consumes	too
much	energy.	It	delays	the	accomplishment	of	our	goals	and	the	realization	of
our	wants.	Because	of	its	very	nature,	the	small	self	is	the	creator	of	guilt	and	its
self-perpetuator;	that	is,	out	of	guilt	we	strive	to	accomplish	and	achieve	success.
Then,	when	we	achieve	success,	we	feel	guilty	because	we	have	it.	There	is	no
winning	of	the	guilt	game.	The	only	solution	is	to	give	it	up,	to	let	it	go.

Our	mind	would	like	to	make	us	think	that	guilt	is	laudatory,	and	the	guilt-
mongers	of	the	world	love	to	make	an	idol	of	it.	Which	is	more	important:	to	feel
guilty	or	to	change	for	the	better?	If	somebody	owes	us	money,	would	we	rather
they	feel	guilty	about	it	or	pay	us	the	money?	If	we	intend	to	feel	guilty,	we
should	at	least	consciously	choose	it	instead	of	being	unwittingly	run	by	it.

When	we	move	from	being	selfish	with	a	small	“s,”	we	move	into	being
Selfish	with	a	capital	“S.”	We	move	from	our	smaller	self	to	our	greater	Self.
We	move	from	weakness	to	power,	and	from	self-hatred	and	pettiness	to
lovingness	and	harmony.	We	move	from	strife	to	ease,	and	from	frustration	to
accomplishment.

In	summation,	then,	instead	of	the	motivation	of	selfishness	and	desire,	we

can	much	more	effortlessly	bring	into	our	life	that	which	we	want	by	envisioning
what	we	wish	to	have	happen.	We	do	this	by	declaration	of	our	intention,	by
acceptance,	by	decision,	and	by	the	act	of	consciously	choosing.

CHAPTER

8

ANGER

Anger	may	vary	all	the	way	from	rage	to	mild	resentment.	It	includes	revenge,
outrage,	indignation,	fury,	jealousy,	vindictiveness,	spite,	hatred,	contempt,
wrath,	argumentativeness,	hostility,	sarcasm,	impatience,	frustration,	negativity,
aggression,	violence,	revulsion,	meanness,	rebellion,	explosive	behavior,
agitation,	abusiveness,	abrasiveness,	smoldering,	sullenness,	pouting,	and
stubbornness.	These	variations	of	anger	are	well	exemplified	by	the	daily	news
on	television.

Anger	may	come	up	about	the	technique	of	surrender	itself.	Anger	that	one
is	expected	to	let	go	of	feelings	that,	in	the	past,	have	been	valued.	Anger	at	the
fear	of	loss.	Anger	at	feelings	in	general.	Anger	at	a	feeling	that	does	not
relinquish	immediately.

There	is	a	lot	of	energy	in	anger;	therefore,	we	may	actually	feel	energized

when	we	are	irritated	or	angry.	One	of	the	tricks	people	learn	is	to	move	up
quickly	from	apathy	and	grief	into	anger,	and	then	to	jump	from	anger	to	pride,
and	then	on	into	courage.	In	anger,	there	is	the	energy	for	action.	This	results	in
doingness	in	the	world.	When	the	“have-nots”	of	the	world	become	energized	by
desire	and	move	up	to	anger	over	what	they	lack,	that	anger	moves	them	into	the
actions	necessary	to	fulfill	their	dreams	for	a	better	life.

The	quantity	of	suppressed	anger	in	the	population	can	be	verified	quickly

by	seeing	how	popular	violence	is	in	the	media,	where	the	viewers	are	presented
with	a	vicarious	experience	of	letting	out	their	anger	in	the	form	of	beatings,
shootings,	stabbings,	lynchings,	killings	of	various	“bad	guys.”

We	typically	feel	so	much	guilt	about	anger	that	we	find	it	necessary	to

	
make	the	object	of	our	anger	“wrong”	so	that	we	can	say	our	anger	is	“justified.”
Few	are	the	persons	who	can	take	responsibility	for	their	own	anger	and	just	say,
“I	am	angry	because	I	am	full	of	angriness.”

Using	Anger	Positively
It	is	common	for	people	to	repress	their	anger,	aggression,	and	inner	hostility;
they	view	it	as	unpleasant,	undignified,	and	even	as	a	moral	failure	or	spiritual
setback.	They	do	not	realize	that	repressed	anger	is	nonetheless	the	energy	of
anger	and,	if	not	acknowledged	and	worked	through,	it	will	have	deleterious
consequences	to	their	health	and	overall	progress.	The	intention	behind	anger	is
negative,	and	it	will	have	similar	consequences	even	if	it	is	not	expressed.

A	helpful	approach	is	to	view	the	energy	of	anger	positively	and	to	use	it	to
fire	up	our	ambitions	and	our	actions	in	a	useful	way.	For	instance,	let’s	say	that
we	are	angry	at	our	boss.	We	feel	resentful.	He	never	seems	to	acknowledge	our
abilities	or	efforts.	But	we	know	it’s	unwise	to	express	anger	and	resentment.	It
would	very	likely	result	in	the	loss	of	our	job	or	at	least	bring	on	the	continued
resentment	of	the	boss.	At	best,	the	expression	of	anger	would	result	in	a	tacky
situation.	Instead,	we	can	make	a	decision	to	use	that	energy	in	a	constructive
way	in	our	own	behalf.	It	can	be	the	inspiration	for	us	to	create	a	project	that,
because	of	its	excellence,	proves	our	point.	It	might	be	the	energy	for	us	to	move
up	and	out	of	a	situation	that	is	unsatisfactory.	We	can	utilize	that	energy	to
create	new	job	opportunities	or	find	a	better	job,	form	a	committee,	improve	our
employment	situation,	start	a	union,	or	whatever	we	think	would	benefit	our
personal	goals.

In	personal	relationships,	the	same	opportunity	exists.	The	anger	can	be
utilized	to	inspire	us	to	improve	our	communication	skills,	take	a	course	on
interpersonal	relationships,	or	enroll	in	a	self-improvement	program.	The	anger
can	inspire	us	to	rededication,	to	put	forth	greater	clarity	of	effort,	and	to	actually
do	a	better	job.	In	this	way,	the	situation	can	result	in	recommitment.	It	can
inspire	us	to	look	within	ourselves	and	relinquish	all	the	negative	feelings,	via
acceptance.	Instead	of	being	mad	about	it,	we	can	accept	it.

Self-Sacrifice
There	are	many	sources	of	anger.	We	have	already	mentioned	that	very	often	a
complex	of	angry	feelings	is	connected	with	fear,	and	the	anger	disappears	when
we	let	go	of	the	fear.	Another	source	of	anger	is	that	of	pride,	and	especially	that
aspect	of	pride	called	vanity.	Frequently,	it	is	our	personal	pride	that	feeds	and
propagates	the	anger.

One	source	of	pride	is	connected	with	self-sacrifice.	If	our	relationships	with

others	are	associated	with	our	small	self	in	the	form	of	sacrifice,	then	we	are
setting	ourselves	up	for	later	anger,	because	the	other	person	is	usually	unaware
of	our	“sacrifice”	and	is,	therefore,	unlikely	to	fulfill	our	expectations.

An	example	of	this	comes	from	a	day	in	the	life	of	a	typical	traditional
marriage.	The	wife	spends	the	entire	day	working	hard	at	cleaning	the	house,
meticulously	looking	after	the	plants,	bringing	in	flowers,	rearranging	some
furniture,	and	doing	all	she	can	to	make	the	house	look	beautiful.	When	the
husband	comes	home,	he	doesn’t	say	a	word	about	the	house	or	even	seem	to
notice.	Instead,	he	is	exhausted	from	a	day	at	work,	and	he	recounts	its	various
trials	and	tribulations.	In	his	mind,	he	is	thinking	of	all	the	self-sacrifices	he	has
made:	the	irate	customers,	the	arduous	drive	through	commuter	traffic,	the
irritable	boss,	and	the	pressure	of	deadlines.	He	is	thinking	of	all	that	he	has
done	for	his	wife	and	family.	While	he	is	thinking	of	all	this	hardship,	she	is
feeling	a	mounting	resentment	that	he	hasn’t	acknowledged	her	efforts,	and	she
goes	back	in	her	mind	over	all	the	sacrifices	she	made	that	day.	She	could	have
gone	out	for	lunch	with	friends.	She	could	have	finished	reading	the	book	that
she	is	enjoying.	She	could	have	watched	her	favorite	program	on	television.
Instead,	she	did	all	of	this	for	him,	and	now	he	is	making	no	comment	on	the
results	of	her	efforts.	As	both	harbor	their	grudges,	resentments,	and	frustrations,
their	inner	anger	mounts;	it	is	expressed	as	coolness	and	detachment	as	they
escape	into	television	for	the	evening	and	go	to	bed	silently	to	brood	over	their
grievances.	This	is	such	a	typical	American	home	scene	that	it	is	almost	banal	to
repeat	it	here.	Yet,	its	commonness	speaks	of	its	learning	value	to	us;	we	can
examine	it	and	try	to	unravel	this	decline	of	a	relationship.

That	which	we	want,	desire,	and	insist	upon	from	another	person	is	felt	by

them	as	pressure.	They	will,	therefore,	unconsciously	resist.	In	the	above
example,	both	persons	are	looking	for	acknowledgment.	They	want	it,	desire	it,
but	block	it	in	each	other.	Each	side	feels	pressured	and,	consequently,	resistant.
The	resistance	is	because	pressure	is	always	felt	by	us	as	a	denial	of	our	choice.
It	is	felt	as	emotional	blackmail.	The	unconscious	formula	goes,	“Give	me	what
I	want	or	I	will	punish	you	by	withdrawal,	anger,	pouting,	sulking,	and
resentment.”	We	all	resent	feeling	emotionally	blackmailed.	We	all	know	the
resistance	we	feel	when	we	become	aware	that	somebody	is	fishing	for	a
compliment,	and	the	same	resistance	goes	on	unconsciously	as	well	as
consciously.

When	we	are	motivated	by	self-sacrifice,	we	are	pressuring	the	other	person.

Even	if	we	force	an	acknowledgment,	it	will	be	a	disgruntled	one.	A	forced
compliment	does	not	satisfy.	Part	of	the	anger	here	arises	from	the	pride	of	self-

sacrifice.	We	have	a	certain	secret	vanity	about	what	we	are	doing	for	others,
and	our	pride	of	achievement	makes	us	vulnerable	to	anger	when	our	“sacrifice”
is	not	recognized.

The	way	to	offset	this	anger	is	to	acknowledge	and	relinquish	the	pride,
surrender	our	desire	for	the	pleasure	of	self-pity	and,	instead,	view	our	efforts	on
behalf	of	others	as	gifts.	We	can	experience	the	joy	of	being	generous	with
others	as	its	own	reward.

Acknowledgment
One	of	the	great	secrets	of	relationship	is	acknowledgment.	The	behavior	of
others	toward	us	always	includes	a	hidden	gift.	Even	if	that	behavior	appears
negative,	there	is	something	in	it	for	us.	Very	often	that	something	appears	in	the
form	of	a	signal	to	us	to	become	more	aware.	Let’s	say,	for	example,	that
somebody	calls	us	“stupid.”	Our	natural	response	is	one	of	anger.	We	can	use	the
energy	of	that	anger	consciously:	“What	is	that	person	asking	me	to	become
more	aware	of?”	If	we	ask	ourselves	the	question,	we	may	come	to	the
realization	that	we	were	being	self-centered;	we	were	being	uncaring;	we	were
failing	to	acknowledge	them;	and	we	were	not	being	conscious	and	aware	of
what	was	going	on	in	the	relationship.

If	we	constantly	follow	this	procedure,	we	will	come	to	the	awareness	that

everyone	in	our	life	is	acting	as	a	mirror.	They	are	really	reflecting	back	to	us
what	we	have	failed	to	acknowledge	within	ourselves.	They	are	forcing	us	to
look	at	what	needs	to	be	addressed.	What	aspect	of	our	smaller	self	needs	to	be
relinquished?	This	means	that	we	have	to	constantly	let	go	of	our	pride	in	order
to	undo	anger,	so	that	we	can	be	grateful	for	the	continual	opportunities	of
growth	with	which	we	are	presented	in	the	course	of	everyday	experience.

To	do	this,	we	have	to	resist	the	temptation	to	indulge	in	making	ourselves
and	others	“wrong.”	If	we	look	at	the	“small	self”	aspect	of	ourselves,	we	will
see	that	making	ourselves	and	others	“wrong”	is	one	of	its	favorite	activities
(e.g.,	politics	and	the	media).	This	is	because	the	small	self	is	ignorant	of	better
ways	to	accomplish	our	goals.	It	does	not	see	the	alternative,	which	is	choosing
to	change	a	situation	out	of	free	choice.

One	way	we	force	ourselves	out	of	unsatisfactory	situations	is	by	making
ourselves	or	the	situation	“wrong.”	Instead	of	merely	choosing	to	find	a	better
job,	for	instance,	our	smaller	self	makes	the	job,	the	boss,	and	fellow	workers
“wrong.”	Because	of	the	picture	of	wrongness,	the	situation	now	becomes
intolerable,	and	we	are	forced	to	change	it.	How	much	easier	it	would	have	been
had	we	just	simply	chosen	to	move	on	to	a	better	situation.	However,	because	of
our	sense	of	obligation,	guilt	is	very	often	the	block	to	this	simpler	way.	In	other

words,	because	of	what	has	benefited	us	in	a	situation,	we	feel	guilty	about
leaving	it.	So	the	unconscious	ingeniously	has	created	the	whole	mechanism	of
wrongness	to	force	us	out	of	dead-end	situations.	This	often	happens	in
interpersonal	relationships	where	we	feel	that	we	have	to	make	the	other	person
“wrong”	in	order	to	justify	leaving	them.	Resorting	to	the	mechanism	of
wrongness	is	simply	a	denial	of	our	own	freedom	to	choose.

One	source	of	anger	stems	from	the	unacknowledged	acts	of	the	love	that
we	have	expressed	to	others.	Love	in	this	context	means	the	everyday	simple
forms	of	lovingness	that	go	on	in	every	human	relationship	in	the	form	of
thoughtfulness,	consideration,	polite	gestures,	encouragement,	and	providing.
Very	often	an	internal	dialogue	can	go	on	for	years	about	our	resentment	over
the	other	person’s	lack	of	appreciation	for	our	feelings	about	them.	If	this	is	so
for	us,	it	must	be	the	case	for	others	as	well.	There	are	people,	therefore,	in	our
life	who	are	walking	around	with	an	endless	mental	stream	of	thoughts	about	us,
having	to	do	with	our	lack	of	appreciation	of	their	feelings	for	us.

This	whole	arena	of	anger	can	be	offset	and	prevented	when	we	see	the
enormous	value	of	simply	acknowledging	the	gestures	of	others	toward	us.	This
means	to	acknowledge	all	of	their	communications	to	us.	For	instance,	if	friends
call	us	on	the	phone,	we	thank	them	for	calling	us.	The	reason	for	doing	this	is
that	it	makes	the	other	persons	feel	complete	and	secure	with	us.	It	is	an
acknowledgment	of	their	value	in	our	life,	and	everyone	feels	pleased	when	we
acknowledge	their	value.

By	this	simple	mechanism	of	acknowledgment,	it	is	possible,	within	a
matter	of	days,	to	transform	all	of	one’s	relationships	in	a	rather	dramatic	way.
This	acknowledgment	does	not	have	to	go	on	in	the	outer	world	but	can	take
place	within	oneself.	As	we	examine	our	relationships,	we	can	ask	ourselves,
“What	have	I	failed	to	acknowledge	in	those	with	whom	I	have	daily	contact?”
It	is	a	very	valuable	experience	to	pick	someone	in	our	life	who,	in	our
view,	is	critical	toward	us	and	now,	within	ourselves,	begin	to	look	at	how	we
have	failed	to	acknowledge	them.	We	surrender	all	of	our	negative	feelings
about	them,	and	we	begin	to	give	them	credit,	affirming	their	value	to	us.	Their
value	may	simply	be	that	they	are	a	spur	to	our	emotional	growth	and
development.	The	nagging	spouse	or	scowling	neighbor	is	trying	to	say
something.	Almost	always	in	this	sort	of	situation,	such	persons	are	not	feeling
acknowledged	for	the	contribution	they	are	making	to	our	life.	Once	their	value
to	us	has	been	acknowledged,	the	nagging	stops.

Expectations
When	we	stop	pressuring	others	with	our	expectations,	we	create	an	opening	for

them	spontaneously	to	respond	positively	to	us.	We	can,	in	a	prophylactic	move,
offset	resentments	by	shifting	what	we	have	done	for	others	from	the	level	of
sacrifice	to	the	level	of	a	loving	gift.	We	can	then	acknowledge	ourselves	for	this
move	and	drop	our	expectations,	which	will	dissolve	the	resistances	in	others.
A	simple	experiment	illustrates	this	shift.	There	was	a	man	who	brought
back	two	new	shirts	from	Mexico.	The	new	shirts	were	of	a	totally	different
design	than	the	kind	of	clothes	he	was	accustomed	to	wearing.	The	first	day	that
he	decided	to	wear	one	of	the	shirts,	he	noticed	he	had	an	inner	expectation	and	a
sort	of	subtle	pride	in	doing	something	new	and	different.	However,	instead	of
surrendering	the	pride,	he	decided	to	keep	it;	that	is,	he	purposefully	didn’t	use
the	letting	go	technique	to	surrender	the	pride	and	simply	let	it	be	there.	He
wanted	to	see	what	would	happen,	how	people	would	respond.	That	day,	he
proudly	wore	the	new	shirt	and,	sure	enough,	nobody	even	mentioned	it,	despite
the	fact	that	it	was	totally	different	from	his	usual	attire.	It	must	have	really	stood
out,	but	there	was	not	a	single	comment.	When	he	went	home,	he	had	to	laugh	at
how	true	was	entrepreneur	Robert	Ringer’s	term	for	that	kind	of	a	situation	as
the	“boy/girl	theory.”	(Boy	wants	girl,	therefore,	girl	is	disinterested	in	boy.	As
soon	as	boy	is	no	longer	interested	in	girl,	girl	now	wants	boy.)

The	next	morning	he	decided	he	would	wear	the	other	new	shirt,	but	this
time	he	surrendered	all	of	his	vanity	and	his	expectations	of	being	noticed.	He	let
go	of	that	little	pride	that	he	was	doing	something	new	and	different,	and	he
acknowledged	the	love	of	all	his	friends	and	the	important	part	they	played	in	the
happiness	of	his	life.	By	the	time	he	got	through	the	letting	go	process,	he	was
totally	surrendered	on	wearing	the	shirt.	He	knew	he	was	totally	surrendered,
because	it	was	okay	if	they	noticed	the	new	shirt,	and	it	was	okay	if	they	didn’t.
That	day	was	suddenly	like	new	shirt	day!	Almost	every	person	he	met
commented	on	the	new	shirt,	asked	him	where	he	had	gotten	it,	and	he	spent	the
day	getting	lots	of	attention.	This	experiment	humorously	makes	the	point:	We
get	what	we	want	when	we	stop	insisting	on	it!

Expectation	of	others	is	a	form	of	emotional	blackmail.	We	can	feel	our
resistance	when	others	pull	for	certain	emotional	“goods”	from	us.	We	can	get
away	from	being	emotionally	blackmailed	by	looking	at	how	we	do	it	with
others,	and,	then,	we	can	let	go	of	wanting	to	manipulate	their	emotional
responses	toward	us.

Another	way	of	preventing	anger	is	by	making	a	decision	within	oneself	no

longer	to	accept	invalidation	from	others	or	the	small	aspect	of	oneself.	This
decision	can	be	in	the	form	of	a	firm	declaration:	“I	will	no	longer	accept
invalidation	from	myself	or	others.”	When	this	is	coupled	with	the	habit	of
acknowledging	all	that	is	positive	within	ourselves	and	others,	relationships

rapidly	change,	their	potential	sources	of	anger	having	been	removed.

Chronic	Resentment
Chronic,	unrecognized	anger	and	resentment	reemerge	in	our	life	as	depression,
which	is	anger	directed	against	oneself.	If	pushed	further	into	the	unconscious,	it
can	re-emerge	as	psychosomatic	illnesses.	Migraine	headaches,	arthritis,	and
hypertension	are	frequently	cited	examples	of	chronic	suppressed	anger.	These
symptoms	are	very	often	alleviated	as	people	learn	how	to	let	go	of	their	inner
anger.	For	example,	in	one	study,	the	blood	pressure	measurements	of	the
participants	were	taken	before	and	after	they	received	instruction	on	how	to	let
go	of	negative	emotion.	All	the	people	with	hypertension	showed	drops	in	their
blood	pressure,	both	the	systolic	and	diastolic	(the	upper	and	lower	numerical
readings),	once	they	started	letting	go	of	the	emotional	pressure	that	they	had
built	up	over	the	years.	The	Stanford	University	Forgiveness	Project	confirms
the	cardiac	benefits	of	relinquishing	anger	and	resentment.	In	the	program,
parents	of	children	killed	in	the	Protestant-Catholic	violence	in	Ireland	learned
how	to	let	go	of	their	bitterness	toward	the	“enemy”;	measurements	of	their
cardiac	health	and	physical	stamina	showed	significant	improvement	(Luskin,
2003).	Forgiveness	healed	their	hearts—literally.	As	we	have	said	before,	with
muscle	testing	we	can	prove	instantly	that	anger	and	resentment	have	a
deleterious	effect	on	the	body,	emotions,	energy	flow,	and	on	the
synchronization	of	the	brain	hemispheres.	Anger	kills	the	angry	person,	not	the
so-called	“enemy.”

The	mind	would	like	us	to	think	that	there	is	such	a	thing	as	“justifiable
anger,”	which	takes	the	form	of	moralistic	indignation.	If	we	look	at	moralistic
indignation,	we	will	see	that	it	is	propped	up	by	vanity	and	pride.	We	like	to
think	how	right	we	are	in	a	situation	and	how	“wrong”	the	other	persons	are.	We
get	a	passing	cheap	little	satisfaction	out	of	that,	but	our	muscle-testing	proves
what	the	cost	is	to	our	overall	emotional	and	physical	economy.	The	price	we
pay	for	chronic	anger	and	resentment	is	sickness	and	premature	death.	Is	this
worth	the	small	satisfaction	of	being	right?

The	cost	that	we	are	willing	to	pay	in	these	kinds	of	circumstances	is
sometimes	surprising.	Let’s	say	we	have	a	situation	in	which	we	made	a	loan	to
someone	who	has	never	paid	us	back.	We	have	a	chronic	resentment	about	it
and,	when	we	meet	the	person	socially,	we	say	as	little	as	possible.	If	we	get
honest	with	ourselves,	we	will	likely	see	that	we	are	getting	satisfaction	out	of
our	being	right	and	the	other	person’s	being	wrong.	In	fact,	we	are	enjoying	it	so
much	that	a	part	of	us	really	doesn’t	want	him	to	pay	off	the	debt	because,	then,
we	would	no	longer	be	able	to	enjoy	the	secret	pleasure	of	making	him	wrong.

This	was	precisely	true	in	a	case	involving	several	hundred	dollars.	The	inner
decision	was	made	on	the	part	of	the	lender	to	be	honest	about	all	the	little
satisfactions	of	being	right,	and	making	the	other	person	wrong,	and	then	to
surrender	on	each	one	of	these	ego	payoffs.	Clearly,	the	ego	payoffs	were
blocking	the	other	person	from	repaying	the	loan.	With	continual	surrender,	the
whole	deal	was	totally	let	go,	and	a	shift	was	made	to	view	the	loan	as	a	gift.
Admittedly,	this	other	person	had	really	needed	the	money.	Why	not	simply	see
it	as	a	gift	and	let	go	of	the	expectation	of	repayment?	Now,	instead	of
resentment,	gratefulness	predominated	because	there	had	been	the	opportunity	to
help	another	human	being	in	a	moment	of	real	need.	Within	48	hours,	a	check
arrived	in	the	mail	for	the	entire	amount	with	a	note	of	apology	for	the	delay	in
repayment!

This	experience	and	many	like	it	demonstrate	how	we	are	all	psychically
connected.	The	internal	position	we	hold	about	another	person	is	forcing	them	to
adopt	a	complementary	defensive	position.	It	is,	therefore,	not	Pollyanna	to
forgive	and	forget,	but	a	reasonable	recognition	of	emotional	realities.	The	inner-
actions	between	human	beings	are	determined	by	the	configurations	of	the
vibrational	energies	that	their	emotions	are	radiating	into	space.	The	energy	of
the	vibration,	and	the	thought	form	with	which	it	is	associated,	create	a	readable
record.

Although	this	common,	everyday	experience	is	hardly	news	to	most	women,

who	in	our	society	are	characteristically	more	intuitive,	it	comes	as	a	shock	and
surprise	to	a	large	percentage	of	men.	In	our	society,	men	are	characteristically
left-brained	and	given	to	reason	and	logic	rather	than	intuition,	which	is
characterized	as	a	right-brain	function.

As	we	continue	to	let	go	of	negativity	and	bring	about	inner	emotional
healing,	there	is	a	greater	balance	between	left	and	right	brain	function.	The
intuitive	faculty	is	also	available	in	men;	they	are	often	pleasantly	surprised	as
they	begin	to	recognize	its	emergence.	It	is	satisfying	and	surprising	to	be	able,
instantly,	to	“read”	a	situation	that	was	totally	baffling	to	reason	and	logic.	The
ideal	situation	is	to	form	a	working	hypothesis	with	intuition	and	then	to	use
reason	and	logic	to	check	it	out.	This,	of	course,	offsets	the	anger	that	arises
from	misunderstanding	and	miscalculation,	and	it	increases	the	skillful	mastery
of	emotions.

Another	thing	that	dissipates	anger	is	our	mere	willingness	to	relinquish	it.

Willingness	is	our	overall	decision	to	find	a	better	way,	to	stop	relying	on	anger,
and	to	move	up	to	courage	and	acceptance.	This	willingness	already	starts	the
process	of	relinquishing	anger.	As	students	of	the	martial	arts	are	well	aware,
anger	indicates	weakness	and	vulnerability;	it	is	seen	as	a	tool	that	we	are

handing	to	our	opponent.	We	can	see	from	muscle	testing	why	this	is	so.	The
angry	person	has	already	lost	half	his	muscle	power	and	has,	therefore,	lost	the
split	second	timing	that	is	so	decisive	to	victory	in	hand-to-hand	combat.

It	is	so	prevalent	in	our	society	to	include	the	propensity	to	anger	as	a	male
“macho”	attribute.	We	hear	people	swelling	with	pride	as	they	relate	how	they
“told	that	guy	off.”	We	can	ask	ourselves,	“Who	needs	enemies?	Isn’t	there
enough	negative	influence	in	our	life	without	adding	one	more?”	Especially
when	we	look	at	the	fact	that	all	emotions	generate	a	vibrational	energy	in	the
universe,	what	is	the	point	of	surrounding	ourselves	with	negative	thought	forms
about	those	we	view	as	enemies?	Why	go	out	of	our	way	to	hold	onto	them	as
enemies	by	stockpiling	resentments	and	negativity	in	ourselves?	Likely,	when
we	review	our	own	personal	experiences,	we	will	see	that	the	effort	involved	in
converting	people	we	once	considered	enemies	into	friends	brought	gratification
and	a	later	reward.	In	most	cases,	they	proved	to	be	a	positive	benefit	to	our	life.
We	never	know	whom,	in	a	later	chapter	of	the	book	of	life,	we	are	going	to
need	as	a	friend.

We	need	to	be	aware	that	we	have	unwittingly	become	“injustice

collectors.”	The	media	reports	are	full	of	this	form	of	chronic	resentment.	We
see	“injustice	collecting”	in	international	relations	where	making	the	other	nation
“wrong”	is	actually	a	primary	objective.	We	are	unconsciously	programmed	to
believe	that	“injustice	collecting”	is	“normal.”	In	contrast	to	this	habitual	pattern,
which	is	destructive	and	weakening,	the	letting	go	technique	frees	us	from
keeping	close	account	of	the	“wrongs”	made	against	us.	Our	time	and	attention
are	freed	up	to	see	the	beauty	and	opportunity	around	us.

Anger	is	binding,	not	freeing.	It	connects	us	to	another	person	and	holds
them	in	our	life	pattern.	We	are	stuck	in	the	negative	pattern	until	we	let	go	of
the	energy	of	anger	and	its	little	payoffs	of	righteous	indignation,	feeling
wronged,	and	the	desire	for	revenge.	It	may	not	be	exactly	the	same	person	who
constantly	recurs	in	our	life.	If	not	that	person,	then	others	will	appear	who	have
the	same	quality	that	triggers	our	anger	and	resentment.	This	will	keep	recurring
until	we	finally	handle	our	inner	angriness.	Then,	suddenly,	people	with	that
quality	disappear	from	our	life.	Therefore,	anger	may	force	someone	to	be
physically	distant	from	us,	but	psychically	it	binds	them	to	us	more	closely,	until
we	fully	relinquish	the	anger	and	resentment.

Relinquishing	anger	brings	us	many	benefits.	We	are	free	to	experience
emotional	comfort	and	ease,	gratitude	for	the	daily	opportunities	to	grow	and
heal,	mutual	caring	with	another	without	subtle	“strings	attached,”	improvement
in	health,	and	more	life	energy.	These	breakthroughs	allow	us	to	move	up	to	a
more	effective	and	effortless	state	of	inner	freedom.

CHAPTER

9

PRIDE

In	common	parlance,	pride	is	often	thought	to	be	a	“good	thing.”	However,	if	we
take	a	good	look	at	it,	we	will	see	that,	just	like	all	the	other	negative	feelings	we
have	discussed	so	far,	pride	is	devoid	of	love.	Consequently,	it	is	essentially
destructive.	Pride	may	take	the	form	of	over-valuation,	denial,	playing	the
martyr,	being	opinionated,	arrogant,	boastful,	inflated,	one-up,	haughty,	holier-
than-thou,	vain,	self-centered,	complacent,	aloof,	smug,	snobbish,	prejudiced,
bigoted,	pious,	contemptuous,	selfish,	unforgiving,	spoiled,	rigid,	patronizing,
judgmental,	and	in	milder	forms,	pigeonholing.

Intellectual	pride	leads	to	ignorance,	and	spiritual	pride	is	the	main	block	to

spiritual	development	and	maturation	in	everyone.	Religious	pride	by	self-
identification	with	the	righteous	and	“having	the	only	true	way”	is	the	basis	of
all	religious	wars,	rivalry,	and	dismal	occurrences	such	as	the	Inquisition.	The
biggest	downfall	of	all	is	religious	pride	and	considering	oneself	entitled	to	kill
others	who	don’t	share	one’s	specific	beliefs.

In	all	of	us,	the	prideful	feeling,	“I	have	the	answers,”	blocks	our	growth

and	development.	It	is	interesting	that	the	egotistical	part	of	the	mind	is	willing
to	sacrifice	the	whole	remainder	of	a	person	for	its	own	sake.	Rather	than	admit
to	being	wrong,	people	will	literally	give	up	the	life	of	the	body	itself	and
sacrifice	any	aspect	of	life	on	the	altar	of	pride	(e.g.,	religious	wars	and
crusades).	Male	pride	about	those	programs	that	our	society	considers	masculine
blocks	the	emotional	and	psychological	inner	development	of	most	men	in	our
society.	Some	women	are	now	joining	the	ranks	of	chauvinism,	which	only
compounds	the	problem	and	intensifies	the	battle	of	the	sexes.

	
Vulnerability	of	Pride
The	prideful	person	is	constantly	on	the	defensive	because	of	the	vulnerability	of
inflation	and	denial.	Conversely,	the	humble	person	cannot	be	humiliated	for
they	are	immune	to	vulnerability,	having	let	go	of	pride.	In	its	place,	they	have
an	inner	security	and	self-esteem.	Many	people	try	to	substitute	pride	for
genuine	self-esteem;	however,	genuine	self-esteem	does	not	actually	arise	until
pride	is	relinquished.	That	which	inflates	the	ego	does	not	result	in	inner
strength.	On	the	contrary,	it	increases	our	vulnerability	and	overall	level	of	fear.
When	we	are	in	a	state	of	pride,	our	energy	is	dissipated	by	the	constant
preoccupation	with	defending	our	lifestyle,	vocation,	neighborhood,	clothes,
year	and	make	of	car,	ancestry,	country,	and	political	and	religious	belief
systems.	There	is	a	tireless	preoccupation	with	appearance	and	what	other	people
will	think,	so	there	is	a	constant	vulnerability	to	the	opinions	of	others.

When	pride	and	self-inflation	have	been	relinquished,	there	is	an	inner
security	that	takes	their	place.	When	we	no	longer	feel	called	upon	to	defend	our
image,	criticisms	and	attacks	from	others	diminish	and	finally	stop.	When	we	let
go	of	our	need	for	validation	or	to	prove	ourselves	right,	then	the	challenges
against	us	fall	away.

This	brings	us	to	one	of	the	basic	laws	of	consciousness:	Defensiveness
invites	attack.	An	examination	of	the	nature	of	pride	facilitates	the	letting	go	of
it,	as	it	is	no	longer	valued.	It	is	seen	for	what	it	is,	in	truth:	weak.	The	dictum,
“Pride	goeth	before	a	fall,”	prevails.	Pride	is	thin	ice,	a	poor	substitute	for	that
rock-like,	real	strength	that	comes	from	courage,	acceptance,	or	peace.

Is	there	such	a	thing	as	“healthy”	pride?	When	we	talk	of	healthy	pride,	we

are	referring	to	self-esteem,	an	inner	awareness	of	one’s	true	value	and	worth.
This	inner	awareness	is	different	from	the	energy	of	pride.	Self-awareness	of
one’s	true	value	is	characterized	by	lack	of	defensiveness.	Once	we	have
consciously	contacted	the	truth	of	our	real	beingness—the	nature	of	our	inner
self	with	all	of	its	true	innocence,	greatness,	and	nobility	of	the	human	spirit—
we	no	longer	need	pride.	We	just	know	what	we	are,	and	this	self-knowledge	is
sufficient	for	us.	That	which	we	truly	know	never	needs	defense	and	is	different
from	the	energy	of	pride	that	we	are	discussing	in	this	chapter.

Let’s	look	at	some	of	the	kinds	of	pride	with	which	we	have	been

programmed	and	see	how	they	bear	up	under	examination.	Pride	of	family,	pride
of	country,	and	pride	of	accomplishment	are	typical	examples	that	come	to	mind.
Is	pride	really	the	loftiest	of	human	emotions?	The	very	fact	that	it	is
characterized	by	defensiveness	proves	otherwise.	When	we	have	pride	in	our
possessions	or	in	some	organizations	with	which	we	identify,	we	feel	obligated

to	defend	them.	Pride	in	our	ideas	and	opinions	leads	to	endless	arguments,
conflict,	and	woe.

A	higher	feeling	state	than	pride	is	that	of	love.	If	we	love	all	of	the	things
noted	above	(family,	country,	accomplishments),	that	means	there	is	no	question
of	their	worth	in	our	mind.	We	no	longer	have	to	be	on	the	defensive.	When	true
recognition	and	knowledge	replace	opinion,	which	is	part	of	pride,	there	is	no
room	for	argument.	Our	sheer	love	and	appreciation	for	something	is	a	solid
position	that	cannot	be	assailed.

Pride,	because	it	is	a	vulnerable	position,	always	implies	that	somewhere
there	is	a	doubt	that	needs	to	be	cleared	up,	and	the	opponent	quickly	centers	on
that	doubt.	When	all	doubts	have	been	removed,	opinions	and	pride	disappear.
There	is	a	subtle	inference	of	apology	in	pride,	as	though	the	thing	in	itself	was
not	good	enough	to	stand	on	its	own	merit.	That	which	is	worthy	of	our	love	and
respect	hardly	needs	an	apologist.	Pride	infers	subtly	that	there	is	room	for
debate	and	that	the	worth	of	something	is	open	to	question.

When	we	truly	love	something	and,	thereby,	become	one	with	it,	it	is
because	we	see	its	intrinsic	perfection.	In	fact,	its	“faults”	are	part	and	parcel	of
its	perfection,	for	all	that	we	see	in	the	universe	is	in	the	process	of	becoming.	In
that	process,	its	perfect	evolution	is	part	of	that	perfection.	Thus	the	half-
unfolded	flower	is	not	an	imperfect	flower	that	needs	defense.	On	the	contrary,
its	blossoming	is	proceeding	with	precise	perfection	according	to	the	laws	of	the
universe.	Likewise,	each	and	every	individual	on	the	planet	is	unfolding,
growing,	learning,	and	reflecting	that	same	perfection.	We	might	say	that	the
unfoldment	of	the	evolutionary	process	is	proceeding	precisely	according	to
cosmic	laws.

One	of	the	drawbacks	about	the	position	of	pride,	as	we	have	said,	is	its
vulnerability.	Vulnerability	then	invites	attack;	therefore,	in	society,	we	witness
that	prideful	people	draw	criticism,	and	their	vulnerability	is	what	accounts	for
the	saying,	“Pride	goeth	before	a	fall.”	In	the	biblical	account,	it	was	Lucifer’s
pride	that	was	his	Achilles’	heel,	despite	the	great	standing	that	he	had	acquired.

Humility
The	attempt	to	suppress	pride	out	of	guilt	simply	does	not	work.	It	is	not	helpful
to	label	the	energy	of	pride	a	“sin”	and	to	suppress	it	in	ourselves	out	of	guilt,	to
hide	it,	or	to	pretend	that	we	do	not	experience	it.	What	happens	is	that	the
energy	subtly	takes	on	a	new	form,	known	as	spiritual	pride.

We	do	not	feel	comfortable	in	the	presence	of	those	who	are	prideful;
therefore,	pridefulness	blocks	communication	and	the	expression	of	love.
Although	we	love	those	who	are	prideful	about	specific	accomplishments,	we

love	them	in	spite	of	their	pride	and	not	because	of	it.

Feeling	guilty	about	pride	as	a	spiritual	sin	only	locks	it	in	and,	as	we	have

said,	is	not	really	the	answer.	The	real	answer	is	merely	to	let	go	of	it	by
examining	its	true	nature.	Once	we	see	pride	for	what	it	is,	it	is	one	of	the	easier
emotions	to	surrender.	To	begin	with,	we	can	ask	ourselves:	“What	is	the
purpose	of	pride?	What	is	its	payoff?	Why	do	I	seek	it?	For	what	does	it
compensate?	What	do	I	have	to	realize	about	my	true	nature	in	order	to	let	pride
go	without	a	feeling	of	loss?”	The	answer	is	rather	obvious.	The	smaller	we	feel
within,	the	more	we	have	to	compensate	for	an	inner	sense	of	inadequacy,
unimportance,	and	valuelessness	by	the	substitution	of	the	emotion	of	pride.

The	more	we	surrender	our	negative	emotions,	the	less	we	will	rely	on	the
crutch	of	pride.	In	its	place,	there	will	be	a	quality	that	the	world	calls	“humility”
and	that	we	subjectively	experience	as	peacefulness.	True	humility	is	distinct
from	the	paradox	of	“pride	in	one’s	humility,”	or	“false	modesty,”	seen
frequently	in	the	public	arena.	False	modesty	is	the	pretense	of	self-
diminishment	with	the	longing	that	others	will	recognize	the	accomplishments
that	one	is	so	proud	of,	but	too	proud	to	brag	about	openly.

True	humility	cannot	be	experienced	by	the	person	who	is	said	to	possess	it,
because	it	is	not	an	emotion.	As	we	have	said	before,	the	truly	humble	cannot	be
humbled.	They	are	immune	to	humiliation.	They	have	nothing	to	defend.	There
is	no	vulnerability	and,	therefore,	the	truly	humble	do	not	experience	critical
attacks	by	others.	Instead,	a	truly	humble	person	sees	the	critical	verbalization	by
another	person	as	merely	a	statement	of	the	other	person’s	inner	problems.	For
instance,	if	somebody	were	to	say,	“You	think	you’re	pretty	good,	don’t	you?,”
what	the	truly	humble	person	would	see	is	that	the	other	person	has	a	problem
with	envy,	and	the	question	has	no	basis	in	reality	in	the	first	place.	There	is
nothing	to	be	offended	by	and	no	need	to	react.	In	contrast,	for	a	prideful	person,
this	question	would	be	viewed	as	an	insult	and	lead	to	hurt	feelings,	verbal
comeback,	or	even	a	violent	end	in	some	cases.

Joy	and	Gratitude
Because	pride	is	sometimes	seen	as	a	motivator	of	achievement,	what	would	be
its	higher	level	substitute?	One	answer	would	be	joy.	What	is	wrong	with	joy	as
the	reward	for	successful	achievement,	rather	than	pride?	Pride	carries	with	it	the
desire	for	recognition	from	others	and,	consequently,	there	is	a	vulnerability	to
anger	and	disappointment	if	it	is	not	forthcoming	at	some	point.	If	we	achieve	a
certain	goal	for	the	pleasure,	enjoyment,	love	of	accomplishment,	and	the	inner
joy	that	it	brings	to	us,	we	are	invulnerable	to	the	reaction	of	others.

We	can	recognize	our	proneness	to	pain	by	looking	at	the	kind	of	reactions

we	are	hoping	to	elicit	from	others	by	our	choices	and	behavior.	This	includes
mannerisms,	expressions,	style	of	dress,	the	kind	of	possessions	we	choose,	the
brand	name	of	car	we	drive,	the	kind	of	home	we	have,	the	address	at	which	we
live,	the	schools	we	have	attended	or	which	our	children	attend,	or	the	labels	on
the	products	we	buy.	In	fact,	if	we	look	at	our	current	society,	we	see	to	what	an
absurd	degree	this	pridefulness	has	taken	place.	Labels	are	now	worn	on	the
outside	of	many	clothes	and	personal	articles.	It	hasn’t	reached	the	level	of	rakes
and	shovels	yet,	but	it	could	sooner	or	later!	Nobody	has	thought	of	it	yet,	but	we
could	all	carry	around	rakes	and	shovels	ostentatiously	with	designer	names
emblazoned	upon	them.

This	points	to	another	one	of	the	drawbacks	of	pride:	the	exploitability	to
which	it	exposes	us.	Pridefulness	means	that	we	can	be	manipulated	with	great
ease.	In	return	for	an	absurdity,	a	great	deal	of	money	is	lifted	out	of	our
pocketbooks.	The	situation	is	currently	comical	in	that	people	take	great	pride	in
how	much	they	have	been	exploited.	It	is	a	current	status	symbol	among	certain
circles	to	brag	about	how	much	one	has	paid	for	certain	things.	When	we	remove
the	glamour	from	it,	we	might	say	that	the	person	was	sort	of	stupid.	They	really
got	suckered	in	or	was	naïve	and	just	didn’t	know	any	better.

The	pride	of	snobbishness	is	probably	the	most	supercilious	of	all.	Does

ostentation	really	impress?	Actually,	no.	The	response	that	we	see	is	one	of
fascination.	People	get	a	charge	out	of	the	superficial	glamour,	but	underneath
they	do	not	truly	respect	it,	because	they	know	what	it	really	is.	When	we	settle
for	the	pridefulness	of	ostentation,	we	impress	no	one.

This	dynamic	revealed	itself	during	a	trip	to	Canada	to	visit	the	home	of	a
wealthy	individual	who	subtly	conveyed	the	price	tag	of	his	many	possessions.
On	the	same	trip,	malnourished	Canadian	Indian	children	were	seen	playing
around	the	huge	grain	elevators	that	were	filled	to	overflowing,	the	grain	being
held	there	to	manipulate	a	higher	world	price	through	artificial	creation	of	a
shortage.	As	this	wealthy	person	talked	of	his	possessions,	images	of	the
children	with	their	thin	little	legs	flashed	to	mind.	Far	from	being	impressed	with
his	wealth,	there	was	sorrow	for	his	sense	of	values	and	compassion	for	the	lack
of	self-worth	that	forced	him	to	compensate	in	such	a	pathetic	superficiality.

Does	that	mean	that	we	cannot	take	pleasure	in	expensive	possessions?	No,

not	at	all.	What	we	are	talking	about	is	pride.	The	problem	is	not	that	we	have
possessions,	but	that	we	have	a	prideful,	possessive,	and	self-congratulatory
attitude	about	them.	It	is	the	attitude	of	pride	that	creates	the	space	for	fear.	The
same	wealthy	man	in	Canada	mentioned	above	also	had	an	expensive	burglar
alarm	system.	Pride,	like	all	the	other	negative	emotions,	engenders	guilt.	Guilt
engenders	fear.	Fear	means	potential	loss.	Pride,	therefore,	always	means	a	loss

of	peace	of	mind.

The	opposite	of	prideful	acquisitiveness	is	simplicity.	Simplicity	does	not
mean	poverty	of	possessions;	rather,	it	is	a	state	of	mind.	Another	individual	is
worth	millions	of	dollars,	and	she	holds	title	to	vast	estates	and	possessions.	Yet,
as	a	person,	she	represents	absolute	simplicity.	Her	possessions	reflect	what	the
world	has	brought	to	her,	and	she	takes	joy	in	their	beauty.	Consequently,	never
a	single	criticism	is	made	of	her,	nor	do	others	express	envy.

It	is	not	what	we	have	that	matters,	but	how	we	hold	it,	how	we	frame	it	in
our	consciousness,	and	its	meaning	to	us.	Incidentally,	this	woman’s	entire	estate
is	totally	devoid	of	burglar	alarms	or	watchdogs.	In	fact,	when	this	was	brought
to	her	attention,	she	replied,	“Oh,	heavens!	If	somebody	really	needed	something
that	much,	they	could	have	it!”	There	was	a	correspondence	between	the	fact
that	nobody	ever	stole	anything	from	her	and	the	fact	that	she	was	willing	to
share	with	others.	Her	invulnerability	to	theft	was	related	to	her	lack	of
pridefulness	about	her	possessions.

Possessiveness	and	attachment	occur	as	a	consequence	of	pride.	Attachment

is,	therefore,	a	potential	cause	for	suffering,	because	attachment	brings	about
fear	of	loss	and,	with	loss,	we	go	back	into	apathy,	depression,	and	grief.	If	we
are	prideful	of	a	car	and	somebody	steals	it,	we	will	experience	anguish,	pain,
and	suffering.	If,	instead,	we	loosely	hold	the	car	(emotionally	speaking),	and	we
enjoy	its	beauty	and	perfection	and	we	feel	grateful	for	having	it,	its	loss	will
bring	about	only	minor	disappointment.

Gratitude	is	one	of	the	antidotes	of	pride.	If	we	happen	to	be	born	with	a

high	IQ,	we	can	be	grateful	for	it	rather	than	take	pride	in	it.	It’s	not	an
accomplishment;	we	were	born	with	it.	If	we	are	grateful	for	what	has	been
given	us	and	for	what	has	been	fulfilled	through	our	God-given	talents	and
endeavors,	then	we	are	in	a	peaceful	state	of	mind	and	invulnerable	to	pain.

It	is	a	comical	curiosity	of	the	human	mind	to	watch	how	it	attaches	pride	to
anything	that	is	prefixed	by	the	word	“mine.”	We	can	have	absurd	pride	over	the
most	trivial	things	and,	once	we	see	the	comedy	of	that,	it	is	not	too	difficult	to
let	go	of	the	pride	involved.

Some	people,	ironically,	have	the	vulnerability	of	reverse	snobbery.	They

take	pride	in	“bargains”	and	thrift	store	conquests.	Their	personal	opinion	of
people	who	pay	excessive	prices	for	things	is	that	they	are	sheep	to	be	sheared
and	they	rehearse	the	quote,	“A	fool	is	soon	parted	from	his	money.”	In	this
thrift	store	snobbery	crowd,	the	status	symbol	is	the	incredible	bargain.	In	fact,
they	are	often	in	competition	with	each	other	to	see	who	will	find	the	best
bargains.	It	is	funny	to	observe	that	an	article	of	clothing	hanging	in	a	thrift	shop
has	no	value	at	all	until	it	becomes	“mine.”	Instantly,	great	value	is	attached	to	it.

The	difficult	side	of	prefixing	things	with	the	word	“mine”	is	the	pride	that

goes	with	that	sense	of	ownership.	This	makes	us	feel	called	upon	to	defend
everything	we	label	as	“mine.”	We	can	reduce	our	vulnerability	by	letting	go	of
the	desire	to	possess;	instead	of	saying	“mine,”	we	can	use	the	word	“a.”	Not
“my”	shirt,	but	“a”	shirt.	Thus,	we	will	notice	that,	if	we	view	one	of	our
thoughts	as	“an	opinion”	instead	of	“my	opinion,”	the	feeling	tone	changes.	Why
do	people	get	so	hot	under	the	collar	about	their	opinions?	It	is	just	because	of
that	sense	of	“mine.”	If	opinions	are	viewed	instead	as	“only	an	opinion,”	then
there	is	no	longer	the	vulnerability	to	prideful	anger.

Opinions
If	we	look	at	opinions,	we	will	see	that	they	are	a	dime	a	dozen.	Everybody	on
the	street	has	thousands	of	opinions	on	thousands	of	subjects,	and	their	opinions
change	from	moment	to	moment	and	are	vulnerable	to	every	passing	whim	of
fashion,	propaganda,	and	faddism.	Today’s	“in”	opinion	is	tomorrow’s	“out”
opinion.	This	morning’s	opinion	is	passé	by	afternoon.	We	can	ask	ourselves:
“Do	I	want	to	spread	out	my	vulnerability	to	attack	by	so	extensively	identifying
with	all	these	passing	thoughts	and	calling	them	‘mine’?”	Everybody	has	an
opinion	on	everything.	So	what?	When	we	look	at	the	true	quality	of	opinions,
we	will	stop	giving	them	as	much	value.	If	we	look	back	on	our	life,	we	will	see
that	every	mistake	we	ever	made	was	based	on	an	opinion.

We	become	much	less	vulnerable	if	we	put	our	thoughts,	ideas,	and	beliefs,
which	are	all	opinions,	into	a	different	context.	We	can	view	them	as	ideas	that
we	like	or	dislike.	Some	thoughts	give	us	pleasure,	and	so	we	like	them.	Just
because	we	like	them	today	doesn’t	mean	we	have	to	go	to	war	over	them.	We
like	a	concept	so	long	as	it	serves	us	and	we	are	getting	enjoyment	out	of	it.	Of
course,	we	discard	it	quite	readily	when	it	is	no	longer	a	source	of	pleasure.
When	we	look	at	our	opinions,	we	will	see	that	it	is	primarily	our	emotions	that
are	giving	them	any	value	in	the	first	place.

Instead	of	feeling	pride	about	our	thoughts,	what	is	wrong	with	just	loving
them?	Why	not	just	love	a	certain	concept	because	of	its	beauty,	because	of	its
inspirational	quality,	or	because	of	its	serviceability?	If	we	view	our	thoughts
that	way,	we	no	longer	need	the	pride	of	being	“right.”	If	we	hold	the	same	view
of	our	likes	and	dislikes,	we	are	no	longer	prone	to	argumentativeness.	For
instance,	if	we	love	the	music	of	a	certain	composer,	we	no	longer	need	to
defend	it.	We	might	hope	that	our	companion	would	also	love	it	but,	if	not,	the
worst	that	we	can	feel	is	mild	disappointment	at	not	being	able	to	share
something	that	we	personally	value	and	enjoy.

If	we	try	this,	we	will	find	that	people	no	longer	attack	our	likes	and	dislikes

and	concepts.	Instead	of	defensiveness,	what	they	are	getting	from	us	now	is
appreciation.	They	understand	that	we	appreciate	certain	things,	and	that	is	why
we	think	the	way	we	do.	But	they	will	no	longer	criticize	or	attack	us.	The	worst
we	will	get	is	perhaps	a	kidding	or	a	quizzical	attitude.	Where	pride	is	absent,
attack	is	also	absent.

This	is	very	valuable	in	those	areas,	such	as	politics	and	religion,	which	are
so	historically	prone	to	elicit	argument	that	they	are	tactically	bypassed	in	polite
society.	We	will	find	that	if	we	love	our	religion,	whatever	it	might	be,	no	one
will	attack	us.	If	we	are	prideful,	however,	we	will	have	to	avoid	the	entire
subject,	because	anger	will	quickly	arise	as	a	by-product	of	the	pride.	When	we
truly	value	something,	we	lift	it	aloft	out	of	the	demeaning	target	range	of
argument.

That	which	we	truly	cherish	and	revere	is	protected	by	our	own	reverence.	If

we	tell	somebody	that	we	do	something	because	we	get	enjoyment	out	of	it,
there	is	really	nothing	much	they	can	say	about	it,	is	there?	If	we	infer	that	we	do
it	because	we	are	right	in	doing	it,	we	will	instantly	see	their	hackles	go	up
because	they,	also,	have	an	opinion	on	what	is	right.

Our	values	are	preferences.	We	hold	them	because	we	love	them,	enjoy

them,	and	get	pleasure	from	them.	If	we	hold	them	in	that	context,	we	will	be
left	in	peace	to	enjoy	them.

The	reason	that	pride	arouses	attack	is	because	of	the	inference	of	being
“better	than,”	which	is	part	and	parcel	of	pride.	We	see	many	people	with	dietary
regimens	about	which	they	are	prideful;	consequently,	they	are	in	constant
arguments	over	the	rightness	of	their	dietary	regimens	and	nutritional	opinions.
They	even	try	to	impose	their	regimens	on	family	members	and	friends,	touting
the	moral	or	health	superiority	of	their	dietary	practice.	In	contrast,	there	are
people	who	follow	the	same	regimens	because	they	enjoy	doing	so,	because	it
makes	them	feel	better,	or	because	it	fulfills	certain	spiritual	disciplines;
consequently,	they	are	never	heard	to	be	in	argument,	because	they	have	nothing
to	defend.	If	someone	tells	us	that	they	eat	the	way	they	eat	because	they	enjoy
it,	there	is	nothing	much	we	can	say	about	it,	is	there?	If,	on	the	other	hand,	they
infer	that	theirs	is	the	right	way	of	eating	and,	by	inference,	that	ours	is	wrong,
what	they	are	really	saying	is	that	they	are	better	than	we	are.	That	always
arouses	resentment.

If	we	don’t	take	a	prideful	stance	about	our	opinions,	then	we	are	at	liberty

to	change	them.	How	often	have	we	gotten	stuck	in	performing	something	we
really	didn’t	want	to	do,	because	we	had	foolishly	taken	a	prideful	stance	on	an
opinion!	Very	often	we	would	like	to	have	changed	our	mind	or	the	direction	in
which	we	were	going,	but	we	got	ourselves	boxed	in	by	having	taken	a	prideful

position.

That	brings	up	one	of	the	resistances	to	surrendering	pride,	and	that	is	pride

itself.	In	the	prideful	position,	one	of	the	underlying	problems	is	fear.	We	fear
that,	if	we	change	our	position	in	a	certain	matter,	the	opinion	of	others	about	us
will	be	adversely	affected.

One	reason	for	the	need	for	humility	about	our	opinions	is	because	our
opinions	change	as	we	get	deeper	and	deeper	into	any	given	subject	or	situation.
What	seems	to	be	so,	upon	superficial	examination,	often	turns	out	to	be	quite
different	when	we	really	get	into	it.	This,	of	course,	is	to	the	dismay	of	the
politician	who	makes	promises	based	on	fantasies	of	what	is	possible.	But	as	he
assumes	power,	he	finds	that	matters	are	quite	different	than	he	had	thought.	The
problems	are	far	more	complex.	The	situation	is	really	due	to	the	net	effect	of
many	powerful	forces	in	society.	All	that	politicians	can	truly	promise	us	is	that
they	will	use	the	best	possible	judgment	for	the	good	of	all,	as	they	get	deeper
into	each	matter.

This	evolutionary	aspect	of	life	is	really	all	that	any	of	us	can	promise
ourselves,	and	this	self-knowledge	will	protect	us	from	disillusionment.	This	is
the	safety	of	the	“open	mind”	position	or	what	is	called	“beginner’s	mind”	in
Zen	practice.	When	we	are	open-minded,	we	are	admitting	that	we	are	not	in
possession	of	all	the	facts,	and	we	are	ready	to	change	our	opinions	as	the
situation	unfolds.	In	this	way,	we	do	not	box	ourselves	into	the	pain	of	defending
lost	causes.

This	is	very	true	even	in	areas	we	think	are	based	on	strictly	factual	and

observable	data,	such	as	the	field	of	science.	Actually,	science	deals	with
hypotheses,	and	scientific	opinion	is	constantly	in	the	process	of	flux	and
change.	Scientific	opinion,	much	to	the	surprise	of	laypersons,	is	also	subject	to
fads,	passing	popularity,	paradigm	blindness,	and	political	pressure.	For
instance,	in	the	field	of	psychiatry,	the	subject	of	the	relationship	between
nutrition,	blood	chemistry,	brain	function,	and	mental	illness	was	not	popular	in
the	past.	The	scientists	and	clinicians	who	worked	in	this	area	found	themselves
in	the	“out”	group.	As	time	passed	and	it	proved	that	there	was	value	in	this	field
of	investigation,	popular	scientific	opinion	changed.	Important	discoveries	were
made,	and	whole	industries	came	into	being	to	provide	products	which	utilized
the	basic	findings	of	the	relationship	between	nutrition	and	brain	function.	The
subject	is	now	accepted	as	respectable,	so	clinicians	and	scientists	can	do
research	in	that	area	and	be	accepted	as	part	of	the	“in”	group.	Pride,	therefore,	is
also	responsible	for	holding	up	scientific	progress	(e.g.,	global	warming
theories).

Pride	blinds	us	to	many	things	that	would	be	profoundly	beneficial;	to	a

prideful	mind,	to	accept	them	would	be	inferring	that	we	are	wrong.	The	more
inwardly	powerful	we	really	are,	the	more	flexible	we	become,	so	that	we	are
open	to	all	that	is	beneficial.	Pride	prevents	us	from	seeing	that	which	is	totally
obvious.	People	die	by	the	thousands	because	of	pride.	They	literally	give	up
their	health	and	life	itself.	Addicts	and	alcoholics	will	go	to	their	death	because
of	the	denial	inherent	in	pride:	“Other	people	have	the	problem—not	me!”	Pride
prevents	us	from	recognizing	our	own	limitations	and	accepting	the	help	we
need	to	overcome	them.	Our	pridefulness	isolates	us.

When	we	let	go	of	pride,	help	comes	into	our	life	to	address	the	problems

with	which	we	are	struggling.	We	can	experiment	and	prove	the	truth	of	that
principle	by	picking	one	area	in	which	we	are	having	difficulty	and	thoroughly
surrendering	all	the	pride	involved.	When	we	do	that,	some	surprising	things
begin	to	happen.	Letting	go	of	pride	unlocks	the	door	to	our	receiving	that	which
is	the	most	beneficial	to	us.	Are	we	willing	to	let	go	of	pride	and	feeling	superior
to	others?	When	we	are	willing	to	let	go	of	the	pseudo-security	of	pride,	we
experience	the	real	security	that	comes	with	courage,	self-acceptance,	and	joy.

CHAPTER

10

COURAGE

The	hallmark	of	courage	is	the	knowledge	and	feeling,	“I	can.”	It	is	a	positive
state	in	which	we	feel	assured,	skillful,	adequate,	capable,	alive,	loving	and
giving,	with	an	overall	zest	for	life.	We	are	capable	of	humor,	activity,
confidence,	and	clarity.	In	this	state,	we	feel	centered,	balanced,	flexible,	happy,
independent,	and	self-sufficient.	We	can	be	inventive,	creative,	and	open.	In
courage,	there	is	a	lot	of	energy,	action,	letting	go,	capacity	to	“be	there,”	to	be
spontaneous,	resilient,	resourceful,	and	cheerful.	In	this	state,	we	can	be	very
effective	in	the	world.

The	Courage	to	Let	Go
The	level	of	courage	is	very	helpful	in	the	mechanism	of	surrender.	In	courage,
we	know:	“I	can	look	at	my	feelings”;	“I	don’t	have	to	be	afraid	of	my	feelings
anymore”;	“I	can	handle	them”;	“I	can	take	responsibility	for	them”;	“I	can	learn
how	to	accept	them	and	be	free	from	them”;	“I	am	willing	to	take	risks,	to	let	go
of	old	points	of	view	and	to	explore	new	ones”;	“I	am	willing	to	be	joyous	and
share	my	experience	with	others”;	“I	experience	myself	as	willing	and	able.”

It	is	often	easy	to	jump	from	any	of	the	lower	feelings	up	to	courage	merely

by	affirming	our	courage	to	look	at	and	handle	our	feelings.	The	mere
willingness	to	look	at	and	begin	to	handle	them	increases	our	self-esteem.	If,	for
instance,	we	have	a	fear	and	are	unwilling	to	look	at	it,	then	we	feel	diminished
and	our	self-esteem	is	lowered.	If	we	are	willing	to	look	at	that	fear,	examine	it,
acknowledge	its	presence,	see	how	it	has	inhibited	our	life,	and	begin	to
surrender	it,	then	our	self-esteem	increases,	whether	the	fear	disappears	or	not.

	
We	all	know	that	it	takes	courage	to	face	fear.	We	champion	the	people	who

face	their	fear	and	attempt	to	do	something	about	it.	Such	courage	is	one	of	the
characteristics	of	nobility	and	makes	a	person	truly	great.	Despite	all	of	their
negative	programming	and	despite	all	of	their	fear,	courageous	people	go
forward	in	life,	with	no	guarantee	and	not	even	the	knowledge	that	things	are
going	to	get	better.	So	courage	increases	our	self-respect	and	brings	to	us	the
respect	of	others.	We	no	longer	need	to	feel	ashamed.

Let’s	look	at	the	example	of	a	man	who	suffered	from	a	lifelong	terror	of

heights.	He	had	worked	on	being	free	of	the	fear	for	several	years	and	it	had
gotten	much	better,	but	there	was	still	plenty	of	it	left.	This	was	evident	when	he
went	to	the	Grand	Canyon	with	a	friend.	At	first,	he	stood	back	about	six	feet
from	the	ledge.	In	previous	years,	he	wouldn’t	have	gone	within	a	block	of	it.
Now	he	stood	there,	hesitantly.	The	friend	took	his	hand,	saying,	“Come	on	over
to	the	edge	with	me.”	And	so	he	did.	He	kept	surrendering	on	the	fear	as	he
walked	forward	and	found	that	he	could	actually	stand	right	next	to	the	edge,
although	admittedly,	not	without	still	feeling	considerable	discomfort.	When
they	left	the	edge	of	the	canyon,	the	friend	looked	at	him	approvingly	and	said,
“Well,	at	least	you	did	it!	I	know	how	much	courage	that	took.”	Even	though	he
had	not	totally	overcome	the	fear,	by	transcending	an	inner	barrier,	he	had
earned	his	own	self-respect	and	the	respect	of	others.

When	we	have	these	breakthrough	experiences,	we	begin	to	perceive	our

fear	differently	and	we	stop	being	ashamed	of	it.	We	stop	allowing	it	to
invalidate	our	true	worth.	It	increases	our	inner	strength	and	our	self-approval.	In
due	time,	the	underlying	fears	which	require	courage	to	overcome	diminish	to
the	point	that	we	move	on	to	acceptance.

Self-Empowerment
On	the	level	of	courage,	the	emphasis	is	on	doing.	We	already	know	that	we	are
capable	of	providing	for	our	own	needs	and	for	those	of	others,	and	we	know
that,	if	we	are	willing	to	put	forth	the	effort,	we	can	obtain	what	we	want.	Thus,
people	on	the	level	of	courage	are	the	doers	of	the	world.	Because	we	can	only
give	away	what	we	ourselves	already	have,	people	on	the	level	of	courage	are
able	to	be	supportive	and	encouraging	of	others.	This	is	because	they	are	able	to
give	as	well	as	receive,	and	there	is	a	balance	between	giving	and	receiving	that
occurs	naturally.

The	levels	of	consciousness	up	to	this	point	are	concerned	primarily	with

gain.	Now,	on	the	level	of	courage,	there	is	greater	power	and	energy.	We	have
the	ability	to	give	to	others,	because	other	people	are	no	longer	being	looked	at
primarily	as	a	means	of	help,	survival,	or	support.	When	we	are	in	the	state	of

courage,	we	sense	our	own	inner	power,	strength,	and	self-worth.	We	know	that
we	have	the	capacity	to	make	a	difference	in	the	world,	not	just	gain	something
from	it	for	ourselves.	Because	of	the	inner	self-confidence,	we	are	much	less
concerned	with	security.	The	emphasis	is	no	longer	on	what	people	have,	but
upon	what	they	do,	and	have	become.

With	courage,	there	is	the	willingness	to	take	chances	and	to	let	go	of

former	securities.	There	is	the	willingness	to	grow	and	benefit	from	new
experiences.	This	involves	the	capacity	to	admit	mistakes	without	indulging	in
guilt	and	self-recrimination.	Our	sense	of	self-worth	is	not	diminished	by
looking	at	areas	that	need	improvement.	We	are	able	to	admit	the	presence	of
problems	without	being	diminished.	As	a	result,	energy,	time,	and	effort	are	put
into	self-improvement.

On	this	level,	statements	of	intention	and	purpose	are	much	more	powerful

and	envisioned	results	tend	to	manifest.	We	are	much	more	enterprising	and
creative,	because	our	energies	are	not	drained	by	the	constant	preoccupation	with
emotional	or	physical	survival.	Because	of	greater	flexibility,	there	is	a
willingness	to	examine	issues	with	a	view	to	changing	overall	meaning	and
context.	There	is	a	willingness	to	risk	shifting	paradigms.

A	paradigm	is	a	whole	worldview,	and	it	is	only	limited	by	what	we	view	as
possible.	As	old	ways	of	looking	at	things	are	challenged,	our	worldview	begins
to	stretch	and	expand.	That	which	was	previously	considered	to	be	impossible
becomes	possible	and	eventually	is	experienced	as	a	new	dimension	of	reality.
There	is	the	capacity	to	look	within	ourselves	to	examine	our	belief	systems,	ask
questions,	and	seek	new	solutions.	On	the	level	of	courage,	we	are	willing	to
take	self-improvement	courses,	learn	consciousness	techniques,	and	risk	the
journey	within	to	seek	our	own	true	Self,	the	inner	reality.	There	is	a	willingness
to	experience	uncertainty,	periods	of	confusion,	and	temporary	upset	because,
underneath	the	temporary	discomfort,	we	have	a	long-term	transcendent	goal.
The	mind	that	is	operating	on	the	level	of	courage	makes	such	statements	as:	“I
can	handle	it”;	“We’ll	make	it”;	“The	job	will	get	done”;	“We	can	see	this
through”;	“All	things	shall	pass.”

If	we	test	a	person’s	muscle	strength	with	kinesiology	when	in	the	state	of
courage,	the	level	of	“I	can	handle	it,”	they	will	test	positive	and	remain	strong
to	our	challenge.	Although	there	is	still	vulnerability	to	negative	thoughts	or
energies—such	as	those	that	emanate	from	fluorescent	lights	or	artificial
sweeteners—the	bio-energy	field	is	more	radiant	than	that	of	the	lower,	negative
states.	Because	courage	is	a	stronger,	more	resilient	energy	field,	physical
illnesses	are	less	likely	to	be	a	predominant	aspect	of	life.	There	may	be	chronic
residuals	of	illnesses	that	originated	from	the	lower	levels	of	consciousness,	but

they	are	generally	not	stabilized.	In	courage,	there	is	an	overall	sense	of	strength
and	well-being.

Awareness	of	Others
The	lifestyle	on	this	level	shows	a	balance	of	work,	enjoyment,	and	love.	There
is	not	the	necessity	for	over-ambition	or	“workaholism,”	although	people	on	the
level	of	courage	are	capable	of	considerable	energy	output	if	the	situation
requires	it.	Because	of	the	letting	go	of	so	much	negativity,	there	is	a	desire	and
a	capacity	to	love	and	to	have	loving	relationships.	These	now	assume	equal
importance	with	efforts	toward	survival.	There	is	vocational	security,	and	in	the
work	area	there	is	concern	for	the	welfare	of	others.	People	on	this	level
characteristically	state	that	they	want	jobs	which	will	be	of	some	benefit	to	the
world.	They	want	to	feel	that	there	is	more	meaning	to	their	job	than	just	a
salary.	Personal	growth	is	important,	and	there	is	the	awareness	on	this	level	that
our	life	is	either	positively	or	negatively	influencing	those	around	us.

On	the	lower	levels	of	consciousness,	which	are	characterized	by	egotism,

there	is	so	much	concern	with	self-gain	that	there	is	little	energy	or	thought
given	to	our	effect	on	others.	On	the	level	of	courage,	we	no	longer	identify
solely	with	the	small	self.	The	world	is	no	longer	seen	as	the	depriving	or
punishing	bad	parent.	Instead,	the	world	is	seen	as	challenging	and	presenting
opportunities	for	growth,	development,	and	new	experiences.	Thus,	this	level	is
characterized	by	optimism	and	the	feeling	that	with	the	correct	facts,	education,
and	orientation,	sooner	or	later	most	problems	can	be	worked	out	satisfactorily.
The	lower	levels	limit	our	consciousness	to	personal	concern,	but	on	this
level	social	issues	become	important,	and	energy	is	expended	to	help	overcome
social	problems	and	to	be	helpful	to	those	less	fortunate.	Therefore,	generosity
becomes	possible,	not	just	financially,	but	also	in	a	generosity	of	attitude.
Pleasure	is	derived	from	the	championing	of	causes	and	from	supporting	the
endeavors	of	others.	This	energy	creates	new	jobs,	businesses,	industries,	and
political	and	scientific	solutions.	Education,	although	not	always	in	the	academic
sense,	becomes	important.

On	the	level	of	courage,	we	really	start	becoming	conscious.	It	dawns	on	us

that	we	have	the	freedom	and	the	capacity	to	choose.	We	no	longer	have	to	be
the	victim,	and	freedom	in	the	psychological,	emotional,	and	spiritual	sense	is
possible.	Therefore,	much	less	rigidity	is	present,	and	because	of	flexibility	and
the	capacity	of	concern	and	genuine	love	for	others,	people	on	this	level	make
good	parents,	bosses,	employees,	and	citizens.

There	is	a	capacity	to	put	ourselves	in	another’s	place	and	a	concern	for	the
feelings	of	others,	as	well	as	their	overall	welfare.	Although	the	lower	negative

feelings	still	tend	to	occur,	they	do	not	predominate	or	determine	one’s	lifestyle;
that	is,	we	do	it	even	though	we’re	scared.	People	on	this	level	are	the	backbone
of	the	country.	They	are	the	people	we	turn	to	when	it	is	necessary	to	do	so	for
the	common	good.	They	are	dependable	and	can	be	counted	on	because	of	their
willingness	to	accept	responsibility.	On	this	level,	there	is	a	social	conscience
and	humanitarianism.	As	the	basis	of	moral	decisions,	guilt	takes	a	back	seat	to
the	welfare	of	others.

It	is	from	this	level	that	we	get	such	sayings	as,	“Success	breeds	success.”
Because	of	adequate	functioning,	there	is	positive	feedback,	which	reinforces
confidence	and	allows	greater	self-exploration	as	well	as	exploration	of	the
world.	Although	effort	is	still	required	to	accomplish	goals,	it	is	much	less	than
on	the	lower	levels.	There	is	greater	satisfaction	and	gratification	because	there
is	greater	reward	with	less	effort	than	that	which	would	be	required	to	overcome
fear.	There	is	much	greater	capacity	not	only	to	seek	help,	but	to	be	able	to
utilize	it	and	benefit	from	it.

Money	is	used	in	a	much	more	constructive	manner,	and	there	is	concern

with	how	the	expenditures	will	affect	the	lives	of	others.	Money	is	not	spent
solely	for	self-gratification,	self-aggrandizement,	or	self-fortification;	rather,	it	is
seen	as	a	tool	for	accomplishment.

This	level	is	the	one	at	which	true	spiritual	awareness	becomes	possible.

Because	of	the	emergence	from	egotism	and	the	relinquishment	of	the
identification	with	the	small	self,	there	is	an	experiencing	of	higher	energies	and
the	hope	of	increased	awareness.	On	the	lower	levels,	God	is	viewed	from	the
emotional	coloration	of	that	level.	Thus,	in	apathy,	the	whole	relationship	with
God	is	hopeless,	if	it	can	be	considered	at	all.	On	the	level	of	grief,	one	feels
hopelessly	separated	from	any	help	from	God.	When	overcome	with	guilt,	the
person	feels	undeserving	of	any	relationship	with	God,	and	punishment	is
expected	rather	than	love.	On	the	level	of	fear,	the	fear	may	be	so	great	that	the
problem	of	God	cannot	even	be	faced,	so	that	the	subject	is	blotted	out	of
consciousness,	and	God	is	viewed	as	fearful,	punishing,	avenging,	jealous,	and
angry.	On	the	level	of	anger,	God	is	viewed	as	depriving,	arbitrary,	capricious,
and	failing.	On	the	level	of	pride,	there	is	egotism	about	one’s	religious	or
spiritual	position,	characterized	by	rigidity,	inflexibility,	intolerance,	proneness
to	exclusivity,	bigotry,	clannishness,	religious	argumentation,	and	warring.
On	the	level	of	courage,	we	are	willing	to	take	responsibility	for	our

religious	or	spiritual	position.	The	increased	awareness	often	results	in	the
emergence	of	the	spiritual	seeker,	and	the	pursuit	of	truth	in	its	religious	or
spiritual	sense	truly	awakens.	This	may	result	in	a	reaffirmation	of	our	previous
position,	but	now	from	a	totally	new	viewpoint—that	of	choice.	It	may	bring

about	changes,	which	may	be	either	slow	and	gradual,	or	sudden.	On	this	level,
there	is	the	awakening	of	consciousness	and	the	realization	that	our	beliefs	and
views	are	now	a	result	of	our	choice,	not	just	a	result	of	previous	blind
programming.	There	is	a	search	for	meaning,	and	this	may	occur	on	the	level	of
ethics	and	humanitarianism	rather	than	in	the	area	specifically	denoted	as	formal
religion.	We	investigate	our	social	function	and	role	in	the	world,	and	we	inquire
as	to	the	value	of	our	lives,	not	only	to	ourselves	but	also	to	others.

Carl	Jung	said	that	the	healthy	personality	is	equally	balanced	between
work,	play,	love,	and	an	aspect	of	personality	called	spirituality,	which	we	could
also	define	as	the	search	for	meaning	and	value.	These	investigations	bring	inner
upsets	but	also	moments	of	acceptance	and	peace.	There	are	moments	of
intuitive	understanding	which	beckon	us	on	to	continue	the	quest,	to	find	out	if
there	is	anything	beyond	just	the	physical	and	material	world	and	its	ever-
changing	phenomena.

This	level	of	consciousness	is	a	good	one	from	which	to	look	at	and	let	go

of	more	negative	feelings.	On	this	level,	we	have	the	energy,	capacity,	self-
confidence,	and	willingness	to	acquire	know-how	and	undergo	the	necessary
steps	of	learning.	On	this	level,	there	is	a	desire	for	self-improvement	and	the
realization	that	better	states	of	mind	are	possible.	The	level	of	courage	knows
that	it	is	not	necessary	to	endure	the	pain	and	suffering	of	the	negative	emotions
or	their	interference	with	the	satisfactions	of	life.

In	courage,	we	are	no	longer	willing	to	pay	the	cost	of	negativity.	We	are
concerned	about	the	effects	of	our	negative	feelings	on	the	welfare	of	others	with
whom	we	are	closely	associated.	Most	people	who	have	learned	the	letting	go
technique	will	continue	to	use	it	until	they	have	reached	this	level	of
consciousness.	On	this	level,	their	major	life	problems	are	now	under	control.
They	are	experiencing	vocational	satisfaction	and	success.	Material	wants	are
supplied.	Major	problems	in	relationships	have	straightened	out.	They	are	no
longer	consciously	experiencing	pain	and	suffering,	and	there	is	satisfaction
from	having	grown	and	developed	in	certain	areas.

When	we	are	comfortable,	there	is	a	temptation	to	stop	using	the	technique

and	only	resume	it	in	emergency	situations,	or	when	negative	feelings	again
become	painful	and	necessitate	our	attention.	However,	there	is	more	yet	to	be
had.	Because	there	is	always	a	feeling	going	on	which	can	be	surrendered,	the
continuation	of	the	process	will	lead	to	greater	and	greater	benefits.

Continual	surrender	will	bring	about	constant,	subtle	changes,	especially	on

the	levels	of	subtle	awareness	in	our	capacity	for	love.	Previously,	we	had
likened	the	radiation	of	love,	which	stems	from	our	higher	aspect,	to	the	energy
of	the	sunlight.	We	noted	that,	as	the	dark	clouds	of	negativity	are	removed,	this

energy	and	our	capacity	to	accept	it	and	radiate	it	outward,	increases
progressively.

On	the	level	of	courage,	our	capacity	to	love	is	now	much	stronger,	and	it

has	the	power	to	support	and	encourage	others,	lending	strength	to	that	which	is
positive	and	constructive	in	them.	Assisting	their	development	brings	us	the
pleasure	of	watching	their	growth	and	their	increasing	happiness.	This	capacity
within	us	can	grow	ever	stronger.	It	can	become	ever	more	powerful	and	self-
rewarding	as	well	as	more	beneficial	to	others.

We	can	utilize	courage	to	reinforce	our	desire	to	grow	beyond	our	present

state,	because	on	this	level,	we	are	already	getting	inklings	that	there	is
something	within	us	that	we	had	hitherto	unsuspected.	These	are	indicated	by
those	sudden	episodes	of	perfect	stillness	and	peace	in	which	we	have	great
clarity,	understanding,	and	heightened	sensitivity	to	beauty.

We	discover	that	it	was	through	the	music—and	not	because	of	it—that	we

experience	our	mind	going	suddenly	still,	and,	in	that	moment	of	stillness,	we
were	allowed	to	experience	a	greater	dimension.	There	may	be	fleeting	seconds
in	which	we	feel	a	complete	identification	and	oneness	with	others,	as	though
there	were	no	separation.

These	are	the	moments	of	breaking	through	into	the	experiencing	of	our	real

inner	Self.	The	memory	of	those	moments	is	never	forgotten.	When	they	first
start	to	happen,	we	don’t	know	what	they	mean.	We	think	they	are	“accidental.”
“Just	due	to	chance.”	We	attribute	the	feeling	to	external	events	such	as	the
beauty	of	a	sunset,	a	symphonic	passage,	or	a	loving	gesture.	But,	as	we
investigate	further,	we	find	that	these	were	only	the	circumstances	that	allowed
something	else	to	happen.	They	were	not	the	cause.	They	allowed	a	certain
stillness	of	the	mind	to	take	place,	and	because	of	that	stillness,	we	were	allowed
a	moment	in	which	we	were	able	to	experience	something	other	than	the	chatter
of	our	own	mind	with	its	incessant,	restless	play	of	sensations,	feelings,
thoughts,	emotions,	and	memories.

In	the	moments	when	time	seems	to	stand	still,	we	get	a	glimpse	of	what	is
possible.	These	moments	are	so	rewarding	that	they	are	treasured	for	a	lifetime.
When	they	occur,	something	is	experienced	that	is	very	impressive.	Could	it	be
that,	beyond	the	turbulence	of	the	world	and	our	own	mind,	there	is	silence?	A
realm	of	peace	that	is	always	waiting?

CHAPTER

11

ACCEPTANCE

In	acceptance,	we	enjoy	the	experience	of	harmony.	We	feel	as	though	events
are	flowing.	We	feel	secure.	We	can	be	of	service	to	others	without	a	feeling	of
self-sacrifice.	There	is	the	feeling:	“I’m	okay,”	“You’re	okay,”	and	“It’s	okay.”
It	is	a	feeling	of	belonging,	connectedness,	fullness,	loving,	understanding,	and
the	feeling	of	being	understood.	It	is	a	feeling	of	caring,	warmth,	and	self-worth.
Because	of	the	security	of	this	state,	we	can	allow	ourselves	to	be	soft,	mellow,
and	natural.	There	is	joy,	and	we	feel	“in	tune”	and	relaxed.	There	is	the	feeling
that	it’s	all	right	just	to	be	ourselves.

Everything	Is	Perfect	As	It	Is
In	the	state	of	acceptance,	there	is	the	feeling	that	nothing	needs	to	be	changed.
Everything	is	perfect	and	beautiful	the	way	it	is.	The	world	is	to	be	enjoyed.
There	is	compassion	for	others	and	for	all	living	things.	In	this	state	we	are
automatically	nurturing	and	supportive	of	others	without	any	feeling	of	sacrifice.
Because	of	the	inner	security	and	feeling	of	abundance,	there	is	generosity	and
ease	of	giving,	with	no	expectation	of	return	or	record	keeping,	such	as,	“Here’s
what	I	am	doing	for	you.”	When	we	are	in	a	state	of	acceptance,	we	love	our
friends	instead	of	being	critical,	and	we	are	willing	to	love	them	in	spite	of	their
limitations,	which	we	willingly	overlook.

The	way	people	appear	to	us	from	this	space	is	that	everyone	is	actually
doing	the	best	they	can	with	what	they	have	at	the	moment.	We	see	that	all	of
life	is	evolving	towards	its	perfection,	and	we	are	in	sync	with	the	laws	of	the
universe	and	consciousness.

	
In	this	state	we	really	begin	to	understand	love.	On	the	level	of	acceptance,

love	is	experienced	as	a	stable	state,	a	permanent	condition	of	a	relationship.	The
source	of	love	is	seen	to	be	within	ourselves,	emanating	from	our	own	nature
and	reaching	out	to	include	others.	In	the	state	of	desire,	by	contrast,	we	speak	of
being	“in	love,”	as	the	source	of	happiness	and	love	is	thought	to	be	outside	of
ourselves.	When	we	are	in	the	lower	energy	level	of	desire,	we	are	looking	to	be
loved.	It	seems	to	be	something	we	“get.”	On	the	level	of	acceptance,	however,
our	lovingness	radiates	out	naturally	from	the	essence	of	our	being,	because
many	of	the	blocks	to	its	awareness	have	been	surrendered.

We	discover	that	this	lovingness	is	our	inner	nature	and	that	it	appears
spontaneously	and	automatically	when	the	blocks	are	removed.	This	is	what	the
great	teachers	mean	by	our	true	inner	essence,	our	true	Self.	It	is	the	aim	of	our
inner	Self	to	transcend	the	ego,	that	composite	of	all	our	negative	feelings,
programs,	and	thoughts,	so	that	we	are	able	to	experience	the	inner	essential
nature.

There	are	many	pathways	that	carry	us	to	the	state	of	acceptance,	and	this	is

the	gateway	which	leads	eventually	to	the	next	highest	states,	described	as	the
consciousness	levels	of	love	and	peace.	To	many	people	who	have	been
surrendering	for	periods	of	time,	this	ultimate	objective	progressively	supersedes
all	others.	To	dwell	in	states	of	unconditional	love	and	imperturbable	peace
becomes	the	inner	aim,	more	important	than	any	other	achievement.

Acceptance	of	Self	and	Others
On	the	level	of	acceptance,	because	of	the	major	change	in	the	way	we	perceive
others,	we	now	become	aware	of	the	inner	innocence	behind	the	frantic,	fear-
driven	struggles	that	have	obscured	it	in	ourselves	and	in	our	neighbors,	friends,
and	family.	The	great	teachers	have	said	that	the	negativity	which	we	see	in	a
person	or	in	society	is	really	due	to	blindness,	ignorance,	and	unconsciousness.
This	inner	innocence,	once	it	is	perceived	in	others,	is	also	perceived	in
ourselves.	All	that	we	did	was	done	because	we	just	didn’t	know	any	better	at
the	time.	If	we	had	known	a	better	way	at	the	time,	we	would	have	done	it	that
way.	“It	seemed	like	a	good	idea	at	the	time,”	we	say.	We	see	that	same
blindness	operating	in	others,	and	we	can	look	past	their	character	defects	and
see	the	innocent	child	within.

Once	we	see	our	innocence,	there	is	an	identification	with	others	and	a	loss
of	feeling	alone	and	stressed.	We	are	able	to	see	innocence	even	behind	the	most
rash	and	apparently	horrible	behaviors.	We	look	inside	a	person	and	see	the
frightened	animal	that	just	doesn’t	know	any	better.	We	are	aware	that,	if
cornered,	it	will	surely	attack	us	and	bite.	It	just	doesn’t	realize	that	our

intentions	are	peaceful,	and	so	it	flails	out	wildly.

In	the	state	of	acceptance,	it	is	possible	to	forgive	our	own	past,	as	well	as
that	of	others,	and	to	heal	past	resentments.	It	is	also	possible	to	see	the	hidden
gift	in	past	events	about	which	we	have	been	resentful—including	their	possible
karmic	significance.	From	this	level,	it	is	possible	to	create	a	different	context
from	which	to	view	the	past	and	thereby	heal	it.	With	the	final	completion	of	the
level	of	acceptance,	we	feel	secure	about	the	future	and	can	move	on	to	the
levels	of	love	and	peace.	Reason	and	logic	become	tools	for	the	fulfillment	of
that	potential.

Another	characteristic	of	the	level	of	acceptance	is	that	we	are	no	longer
concerned	with	moralistic	judgment,	with	“good”	and	“bad.”	It	just	becomes
obvious	what	works	and	what	doesn’t	work.	It	is	easy	to	see	what	is	destructive
and	what	is	optimal,	without	judging	anything	as	“evil.”	There	is	the	elimination
of	guilt,	which	accompanies	all	judgments	against	others	and	ourselves.	We	then
see	the	meaning	of	the	statement,	“Judge	not,	lest	ye	be	judged.”

In	acceptance,	we	have	let	go	of	the	inner	guilt-monger	that	found	fault	with

even	our	most	basic	human	drives.	We	can	enjoy	our	physicality	without
moralistic	aversion	or	compulsive	self-gratification.	We	accept	that	others	have
come	to	their	understanding	of	life	and	their	ethical	views	in	a	way	that	makes
sense	to	them,	even	if	their	beliefs	and	behaviors	are	quite	different	from	ours.
When	we	see	the	innocence	in	everyone,	we	can	truly	fulfill	“loving	our
neighbor	as	ourselves,”	and,	thus,	letting	go	has	allowed	us	to	reach	a	lofty	goal
without	even	the	conscious	attempt	to	do	so.

The	level	of	acceptance	is	characterized	by	the	attitude	of	selflessness	and
service.	This	results	from	the	surrendering	of	the	negative	feelings	that	create	the
small	self,	which	removes	our	identification	with	it.	Instead,	inner	harmony	and
peace	are	experienced	as	the	nature	of	our	greater	Self.	Because	the	negative
programs	have	been	relinquished,	there	is	the	emergence	of	greater	creativity,
inspiration,	and	intuition.

There	is	certainty	that	our	own	personal	needs	will	be	met;	therefore,	there

is	a	shift	in	relationship	so	that	the	focus	is	on	the	welfare	and	happiness	of
others.	This	is	facilitated	by	the	fact	that,	at	this	level,	there	is	no	longer
neediness	in	the	form	of	dependency	on	other	people,	because	there	is	nothing
we	feel	we	need	to	“get”	from	them.	In	a	relationship	of	loving	acceptance,
minor	imperfections	are	no	longer	given	serious	importance	and	are	overlooked.
In	acceptance,	there	is	a	decreased	preoccupation	with	“doingness,”	a
growing	focus	on	the	quality	of	beingness	itself,	and	the	perfection	of	our	own
inner	capacity	for	caring	and	lovingness.	Although	negative	feelings	may	still
arise,	they	are	less	and	less	frequent	and	are	handled	with	greater	ease.	In

general,	functioning	is	now	easy,	and	the	daily	activities	become	hardly
noticeable	because	of	their	effortlessness.

Personal	Responsibility
The	hallmark	of	this	state	is	the	taking	of	responsibility	for	our	own
consciousness.	Interest	in	meditation	and	the	various	methods	of	inner
contemplation	is	common.	Spiritual	and	ethical	matters	become	important.	We
may,	for	instance,	attend	religious	retreats	if	we	are	religious,	or	we	may	engage
in	spiritual	or	humanitarian	endeavors	if	we	are	oriented	toward	those	spheres.

The	world	is	seen	to	be	harmonious,	and	any	alteration	of	that	appearance	is
realized	to	be	a	projection	onto	it	of	our	own	inner	conflicts.	On	this	level,	there
is	the	awareness	that	all	negative	feelings	are	our	own	problem,	and	there	is	no
longer	looking	outside	of	ourselves	for	their	resolution.

There	is	a	seriousness	regarding	the	growth	of	our	own	consciousness	and
self-awareness,	and	a	focus	on	honing	the	quality	of	that	consciousness	itself.	On
this	level,	we	may	begin	to	develop	an	interest	in	the	philosophy,	scientific
research,	and	spiritual	classics	that	explore	the	highest	potential	of	human	mind
and	spirit.	What	becomes	increasingly	important	is	what	we	are	becoming,	not
what	we	have	or	do.	On	this	level,	we	take	on	the	challenge	of	fulfilling	our
greatest	inner	potential	and	nurturing	the	potential	and	dreams	of	others.

If	muscle-tested	in	this	state,	we	test	strong;	we	are	relatively	immune	to

negative	influences,	such	as	the	weakening	vibrations	of	fluorescent	lights,
synthetic	fabrics,	or	artificial	sweeteners.	There	is	a	strong	commitment	to	health
and	wellness,	and	bettering	ourselves	on	all	levels.	Health	issues	are	often
considered	to	be	problems	at	the	psychological,	emotional,	or	mental	levels,	and
resources	are	sought	and	found	which	help	to	resolve	the	issues	at	all	of	those
levels.	The	power	of	self-healing	is	now	available.

In	acceptance,	we	are	free	to	be	in	the	present.	Once	we	have	accepted	our
own	true	nature	and	the	ways	of	the	universe	as	they	are	reflected	in	our	world,
there	is	no	longer	regret	about	the	past,	nor	is	there	fear	of	the	future.	Fear	of	the
future	no	longer	exists	when	the	past	has	been	healed.	This	is	because	in	the
usual	ego-oriented	state	of	consciousness,	the	ego	tends	to	project	the	past	upon
the	future,	and	a	past	that	is	viewed	negatively	becomes	fearful	when	projected
upon	the	imaginary	future.	Our	letting	go	of	the	lower	energies	of	guilt,	fear,
anger,	and	pride	has	alleviated	the	weight	of	the	past	and	cleared	the	clouds	of
the	future.	We	face	today	with	optimism	and	are	grateful	to	be	alive.	We	see	that
yesterday	is	gone,	tomorrow	has	not	yet	come,	and	we	have	only	today.

In	summary,	then,	the	consciousness	level	of	acceptance	is	one	that	we	all
long	to	achieve,	for	it	enables	us	to	find	freedom	from	most	of	life’s	problems

and	to	experience	fulfillment	and	happiness.

CHAPTER

12

LOVE

On	the	level	of	love,	we	are	heartfelt,	generous,	nurturing,	affectionate,	steadfast,
and	forgiving.	Love	is	protective,	collaborative,	uplifting,	holistic,	and	gracious.
It	is	characterized	by	warmth,	gratitude,	appreciation,	humility,	completion,
vision,	purity	of	motive,	and	sweetness.

Love	is	a	way	of	being.	It	is	the	energy	that	radiates	when	the	blocks	to	it
have	been	surrendered.	It	is	more	than	an	emotion	or	a	thought—it	is	a	state	of
being.	Love	is	what	we	have	become	through	the	pathway	of	surrender.	It	is	a
way	of	being	in	the	world	that	says:	“How	can	I	be	of	help	to	you?	How	can	I
comfort	you?	How	can	I	loan	you	money	when	you’re	broke?	How	can	I	help
you	find	a	job?	How	can	I	console	you	when	you’ve	suffered	a	major	loss	in
your	family?”	Lovingness	is	a	way	through	which	we	light	up	the	world.

Love	in	Everyday	Life
Everyone	has	the	opportunity	to	contribute	to	the	beauty	and	harmony	of	the
world	by	showing	kindness	to	all	living	things	and,	thereby,	supporting	the
human	spirit.	That	which	we	freely	give	to	life	flows	back	to	us	because	we	are
equally	part	of	that	life.	Like	ripples	on	the	water,	every	gift	returns	to	the	giver.
What	we	affirm	in	others,	we	actually	affirm	in	ourselves.

Once	we	become	willing	to	give	love,	the	discovery	quickly	follows	that	we

are	surrounded	by	love	and	merely	didn’t	know	how	to	access	it.	Love	is
actually	present	everywhere;	its	presence	only	needs	to	be	realized.

Love	expresses	itself	in	many	ways.	The	little	boy	memorizes	a	ditty	taught

to	him	by	his	father,	and	he	is	still	able	to	say	it	eighty	years	later.	The	Navy

	
sailor	steers	the	ship	through	a	terrible	typhoon	for	three	days,	nonstop,	without
food	and	drink,	when	all	of	his	shipmates	are	seasick.	The	doctor	loves	and	prays
for	every	patient	without	their	knowing	about	it.	The	mother	cleans	up	the	messy
pants	of	a	young	child	with	diarrhea,	saying,	“Honey,	it’s	not	your	fault;	you
couldn’t	help	it.”	The	wife	gets	up	early	to	make	coffee	every	morning	just	the
way	her	husband	likes	it.	The	doggie	waits	by	the	door	for	the	owner	to	return
and	wags	her	tail	when	he	comes	through	the	door.	The	kitty	purrs.	The	songbird
sings.

Typically,	people	think	of	love	as	“romantic”	love,	as	in	“Honey”	and
“Sweetheart.”	But	romantic	love	is	only	a	minor	part	of	a	human	lifetime.	There
are	many	types	of	love	other	than	personal,	romantic	love,	and	they	infuse	our
everyday	experience:	love	of	pets,	love	of	family	and	friends,	love	of	freedom,
love	of	purpose,	love	of	country,	love	of	attributes,	love	of	creation,	love	as
virtue,	love	as	enthusiasm,	love	as	forgiveness,	love	as	acceptance,	love	as
motivator,	love	as	appreciation,	love	as	kindness,	love	as	essence	of	relationship,
love	as	group	energy	(for	example:	Alcoholics	Anonymous),	love	as	admiration,
love	as	respect,	love	as	valor,	love	as	fraternal	bonds	of	unity	(buddies,
classmates,	shipmates,	teammates),	love	as	friendship,	love	as	loyalty,	love	as
affection,	love	as	cherishing,	love	as	self-sacrificing	maternal	love,	love	as
devotion.

“Love	is	a	many	splendored	thing,”	as	the	popular	song	goes.

Experientially,	this	statement	is	true.	When	we	have	surrendered	all	of	the
resistances	to	love	and	let	go	of	the	negative	feelings	that	block	love,	then	the
world	is	radiant	with	the	splendor	of	love.	On	the	level	of	love,	this	radiance	is
no	longer	hidden	from	us.

Love	Heals
Love	facilitates	healing.	It	transforms	life.	We	see	this	in	the	true	story	about	a
duck	hunter	who	was	suddenly	changed	by	witnessing	an	act	of	love.	One	day,
he	was	out	duck	hunting,	which	he	often	did	for	recreation.	As	per	his	usual
experience,	he	saw	a	duck	flying,	shot	it,	and	watched	it	fall	to	the	ground,	badly
injured.	To	his	sudden	amazement,	he	watched	as	the	female	mate	of	the	injured
duck	immediately	flew	down	on	top	of	her	companion	and	spread	her	wings
over	him,	to	shelter	him.	Seeing	her	love,	the	heart	of	a	hunter	was	changed;	he
never	hunted	again.

Once	you	become	loving,	there	are	certain	things	you	can	never	do	again.

And	there	are	certain	things	you	can	do	in	the	energy	field	of	love	that	are
impossible	otherwise.	Moreover,	people	do	things	for	you	that	they	would	not	do
for	others.	Love	makes	possible	the	miraculous	without	labeling	it	“miraculous.”

Love	has	a	transfiguring	effect.

Sometimes,	it	is	best	not	to	tell	people	that	you	love	them	because	they’ll
get	scared	and	think	that	you	have	designs	on	them	or	you	want	something	from
them.	Frankly,	some	people	are	afraid	and	suspicious	of	love;	therefore,	you	love
such	people	without	telling	them.	Lovingness	is	a	way	of	being	that	transforms
everything	around	you	because	of	the	radiation	of	that	energy.	It	happens	of	its
own.	We	don’t	have	to	“do”	anything,	and	we	don’t	have	to	call	it	anything.
Love	is	the	energy	that	silently	transfigures	every	situation.

This	means	that	people	who	are	hateful	will,	in	our	presence,	suddenly
become	willing	to	forgive	others.	We	can	see	the	person	transform	right	in	front
of	us.	Letting	go	of	anger,	they	might	say,	“Well,	there’s	no	reason	to	be	so	mad
at	him	…	he’s	too	young	to	know	better.”	They	will	find	an	excuse	to	defend	the
person,	instead	of	attacking	him.	Love	empowers	us,	and	the	people	around	us,
to	do	things	that	we	would	not	be	capable	of	otherwise.

Forgiveness	is	an	aspect	of	love	that	allows	us	to	see	life	events	from	the
viewpoint	of	grace.	We	forgive	ourselves	for	the	errors	we	made	when	we	were
less	evolved.	It	is	helpful	to	see	the	ego	or	small	part	of	ourselves	as	a	cute	little
teddy	bear.	The	teddy	bear	is	not	“bad”;	we	don’t	hate	or	scold	the	little	bear.
We	love	it	and	accept	it	for	what	it	is:	a	cute	little	animal	who	doesn’t	know	any
better.	We	transcend	the	smaller	aspects	of	ourselves	by	accepting	and	loving
them.	We	see	the	ego	as	“limited,”	not	“bad.”

In	the	energy	field	of	love,	we	are	surrounded	with	love,	and	that	brings
gratitude.	We	are	thankful	for	our	life	and	for	all	the	miracles	of	life.	We	are
thankful	for	the	doggies	and	the	kitties,	because	they	represent	love.	We	are
grateful	for	every	act	of	kindness	from	others,	their	affection,	caringness,	and
thoughtfulness.

Eventually,	we	just	become	love.	Everything	we	do	and	say,	every

movement	we	make,	is	energized	by	the	lovingness	that	we	have	owned	within
ourselves.	Whether	speaking	to	a	large	audience	or	petting	the	dog,	the	energy	of
love	is	felt	to	be	pouring	out.	We	want	to	share	what	we	hold	in	the	heart	as	an
experiential	knowingness,	and	we	hold	it	in	the	heart	for	everyone	and
everything,	that	they	would	be	feeling	it,	too.	We	pray	for	that	inner	experience
of	infinite	love	for	everyone	around	us,	including	the	animals.	Our	life	is	a
blessing	to	everything	around	us.	We	acknowledge	to	others	and	to	our	animals
the	gift	that	they	are	to	us.

Love	emanates	from	the	heart.	When	we	are	in	the	presence	of	people	who

love	each	other,	we	pick	up	that	energy.	The	love	of	our	loved	ones,	pets,	and
friends	is	the	love	of	Divinity	for	us.	When	we	go	to	bed	at	night,	we	give	thanks
that	we	were	surrounded	with	love	all	day.	Each	moment	is	possible	only

because	of	love.	The	writing	of	this	book	is	possible	only	because	of	love.

In	the	state	of	love,	we	wake	up	every	morning	and	give	thanks	for	another
day	of	life,	and	we	seek	to	make	life	better	for	everyone	around	us.	Because	of
the	presence	of	love,	things	go	better;	the	eggs	get	fried	better;	the	ducky	gets
saved;	the	kitty	gets	fed;	and	the	doggie	is	adopted	from	the	pound	and	brought
home.	We	share	our	love	with	everything	around	us,	all	forms	of	life:	kitties,
doggies,	other	people,	all	living	things.	Yes,	even	the	villains.	If	it	is	our	job	to
watch	over	the	captured	villain,	we	seek	to	make	his	life	tolerable.	We	say,	“I’m
sorry	that	I	have	to	hold	a	gun	to	your	head,	but	that’s	my	job.”	We	try	to	be	as
gracious	and	generous	as	we	can	be,	without	exception.

The	more	we	love,	the	more	we	can	love.	Love	is	limitless.	Love	begats
love.	This	is	why	psychiatrists	recommend	having	a	pet.	A	dog,	for	example,
brings	love	and	expands	love	in	the	heart	of	the	owner.	Love	prolongs	life.	In
fact,	research	documents	that	having	a	dog	extends	the	owner’s	life	by	ten	years!
Just	think	of	all	the	bizarre	exercises,	diets,	and	other	regimens	that	people	go
through	to	add	relatively	small	amounts	of	time	on	to	their	life,	when	they	can
simply	get	a	dog	and	add	ten	years!	Love	has	a	powerful	anabolic	effect.	Love
increases	endorphins,	which	are	life-enhancing	hormones.	You	live	ten	years
longer	with	a	dog	in	your	life	because	a	pet	dog	catalyzes	the	energy	of	love,	and
that	energy	of	love	heals	and	prolongs	life.

The	energy	of	love	has	the	capacity	to	heal	our	bodies	when	conditions	are

appropriate.	On	the	physical	level,	because	of	the	prevailing	positive	mental
state,	physical	illnesses	often	resolve	themselves.	Some	diseases	automatically
heal	without	any	particular	attention	being	paid	to	them,	and	those	that	still
remain	usually	respond	to	consciousness	techniques.	Persistent	illnesses	that	are
unresponsive	to	treatment	are	viewed	as	karmically,	symbolically,	or	spiritually
significant.	Overall,	there	is	a	decreasing	awareness	of	the	body,	which	now
goes	about	its	business	and	seems	to	take	care	of	itself	on	its	own.	We	are	no
longer	identified	as	a	body.	There	is	a	loss	of	interest	in	dealing	with	health
matters	on	a	purely	physical	level,	and	there	are	times	when	awareness	of	the
body	disappears	altogether,	unless	we	focus	on	it	for	some	particular	reason.

Intuitive	understanding	progressively	replaces	“thinkingness,”	which	begins
to	disappear.	Over	time,	“thinkingness”	and	its	mental	processes	are	replaced	by
spontaneous,	intuitive	“knowingness.”	Logic	is	bypassed.	This	occurs	because,
at	the	highest	level	of	vibration,	everything	in	the	universe	is	connected	with
everything	else.	Our	understanding	unfolds	as	“revelation”	from	this	inter-
connected	field.	The	knowing	is	holistic	rather	than	limited.

Because	of	the	inner	quiet,	we	have	the	ability	to	perceive	the	thoughts	and

feelings	of	others	on	a	nonverbal	level.	Nonverbal	communication	with	others

becomes	possible	and	commonplace.	Negative	emotions	are	no	longer
experienced	because	the	small	self	has	been	transcended,	absorbed	into	the
greater	Self.	Emotional	phenomena	are	thereby	transformed.	Loss,	for	example,
is	experienced	as	transitory	disappointment	or	regret,	rather	than	as	grief.

Unconditional	Love
By	continual	surrender,	we	experience	the	state	of	unconditional	love	(calibrates
at	540),	which	is	rare	and	occurs	in	only	.04%	of	the	population.	This	energy	is
miraculous,	inclusive,	nonselective,	transformative,	unlimited,	effortless,	radiant,
devotional,	saintly,	diffuse,	merciful,	and	selfless.	It	is	characterized	by	inner
joy,	faith,	ecstasy,	patience,	compassion,	persistence,	essence,	beauty,
synchronicity,	perfection,	surrender,	rapture,	vision,	and	openness.	We
relinquish	seeing	the	personal	self	as	a	causal	agent.	Everything	happens
effortlessly	by	synchronicity.

Joy	emanates	from	the	inner	subjective	experience	of	our	own	existence.
The	power	of	the	joy	is	subjective,	not	stemming	from	any	source	outside	of
oneself.	Thus,	the	energy	of	motor	performance	is	inexhaustible.	We	may	dance
with	ecstasy	all	night	in	a	candlelit	chapel,	as	if	being	danced	by	the	Source	of
Life	Itself.	In	that	state,	the	innate	perfection	and	stunning	beauty	of	all	that
exists	shine	forth	like	a	luminous	radiance,	as	the	infusion	of	spiritual	energy
facilitates	the	transfiguration	from	perception	to	vision,	from	the	linear	to	the
nonlinear,	and	from	the	limited	to	the	unlimited.	While	functioning	in	the	world
is	still	possible	at	the	higher	vibrations	of	love	(high	500s),	we	may	end	up
leaving	the	ordinary	arena	of	commerce	and	abandoning	our	prior	social	milieu
and	occupation.

In	such	states,	the	“miraculous”	is	common.	What	is	termed	“supernatural”
is	seen	to	occur	all	of	the	time,	inexplicable	by	reason,	logic,	or	cause	and	effect.
It	is	clear	that	no	“person”	performs	miracles.	They	occur	spontaneously	on	their
own	when	conditions	are	appropriate.	The	development	of	a	spiritual	ego	is
avoided	by	the	realization	that	the	phenomena	are	a	gift	from	beyond	our
personal	self;	we	are	only	the	channels	of	Love,	not	its	origin.	Spiritual	progress
is	known	to	be	the	result	of	Grace,	not	the	result	of	our	personal	endeavors.
Gratitude	for	the	state	replaces	pride	of	accomplishment.	The	process	of
surrender	continues	ever	more	deeply,	as	we	let	go	of	all	doubt,	all	belief
systems,	all	perceptions,	all	positions,	all	opinions,	and	all	attachments.	We
become	willing	to	surrender	all	attachments,	even	attachment	to	the	exquisite
state	of	Ecstasy,	which	is	beyond	description.

Out	of	humility,	all	opinions	about	others	are	surrendered.	In	a	certain	way,
nobody	can	help	being	other	than	what	they	are.	Love	knows	this	truth	and	takes

no	position.	Love	augments	the	positive	about	others	rather	than	their	defects.	It
focuses	on	life’s	goodness	in	all	of	its	expressions.	Unconditional	love	is	a	love
that	doesn’t	expect	anything	from	others.	When	we	have	become	loving,	we
have	no	limitations	or	demands	on	others	that	they	should	be	a	certain	way	in
order	to	be	loved.	We	love	them	no	matter	how	they	are.	Even	if	they	are
obnoxious!	We	feel	sorry	for	the	criminals	that	they	saw	a	life	of	crime	as	their
best	option.

When	love	is	unconditional,	there’s	no	attachment,	expectation,	hidden
agenda,	or	bookkeeping	of	who	gives	what	to	whom.	Our	love	is	unconditional
for	whatever	we	are	and	whatever	they	are.	It	is	given	without	requirements.	No
strings	are	attached.	We	don’t	expect	anything	back	when	giving.	We	have
surrendered	all	conscious	and	unconscious	expectations	of	the	other	person.

Love	illuminates	the	essence	of	and,	therefore,	the	lovability	of	others.	This
is	because	love	opens	the	heart.	Instead	of	perception,	which	perceives,	the	heart
knows.	The	mind	thinks	and	argues,	but	the	heart	knows	and	continues.	So	even
when	people	make	mistakes,	we	love	them.	Thoughts	tell	us	one	thing,	but	the
heart	tells	us	something	else.	The	mind	can	be	critical	and	disagree,	but	the	heart
is	loving	no	matter	what.	The	heart	does	not	put	any	conditions	on	what’s	out
there.	Only	the	mind	does	that.	Love	makes	no	demands.

A	key	to	making	Love	unconditional	is	the	willingness	to	forgive.	With
forgiveness,	events	and	people	are	re-contextualized	as	simply	“limited”—not
“bad”	or	“unlovable.”	With	humility,	we	are	willing	to	relinquish	our	perception
of	a	past	event.	We	pray	for	a	miracle	to	see	the	truth	about	the	situation	or
person,	and	we	surrender	all	of	our	opinions	about	the	matter.	We	look	at	the
payoffs	we’re	getting	from	keeping	our	perception	of	what	occurred,	and	we	let
go	of	each	little	payoff:	the	pleasure	of	self-pity,	of	“being	right,”	of	being
“wronged,”	and	of	our	resentments.

Eventually,	we	surrender	the	very	idea	of	forgiveness.	To	forgive	someone
implies	that	we’re	still	seeing	the	person	or	situation	as	“wrong”	and,	therefore,
in	need	of	being	forgiven.	True	surrender	means	letting	go	completely	of	seeing
it	in	such	a	way.	When	we	surrender	our	perception	completely,	letting	go	of	all
judgment,	then	the	whole	situation	is	transfigured	and	we	see	the	person	as
lovable.	Since	all	judgment	is	really	self-judgment,	we	have	liberated	ourselves
in	the	process.

On	the	level	of	unconditional	love,	we	love	everybody	and	everything—

even	Adolf	Hitler.	We	look	at	him	as	a	person	who	was	taken	over	by	negative
energies,	and	we’re	willing	to	forgive	Hitler,	who	couldn’t	help	what	happened
to	him.	He	was	overcome	by	evil.	Instead	of	hating	evil,	we	feel	sorrow	and
compassion	that	people	have	become	overwhelmed	by	such	negativity.	Hitler

did	what	he	thought	he	was	required	to	do	by	honor.	That	was	his
contextualization	at	the	time.	He	was	captured	by	certain	ideals	and	beliefs
current	in	his	time.	Even	with	Hitler,	then,	we	can	see	that	he	was	dedicated,	and
he	thought	he	was	being	of	service	in	what	he	did.	In	WWII,	the	kamikaze	pilots
were	doing	what	they	thought	they	should	be	doing	for	their	country.	And	even
though	they	were	trying	to	bomb	and	kill	us,	it	isn’t	necessary	to	hate	them.	We
can	respect	their	willingness	to	give	up	their	life	for	their	country.	We	can	see
that	everybody	who	violates	the	law	of	Love	is	really	a	victim	of	some	societal
belief	system	or	the	pressures	of	the	time.

Oneness
As	the	state	progresses,	all	of	existence	takes	on	a	different	meaning,	and	we
become	aware	of	the	inner	beingness	and	essence	of	everything,	rather	than	just
its	form.	Because	of	this	change	of	perception,	the	perfection	of	all	things	stands
revealed.	This	experience	is	outside	of	time;	there	is	no	past	or	future.	In	its
highest	vibration,	love	sees	no	separation	between	the	individual	and	the	rest	of
the	universe.	We	experience	total	at-oneness	with	all	things.	In	this	state,	the
total	oneness	of	all	things	has	a	greater	sense	of	Reality	than	the	ordinary
perceptions	of	the	self	in	the	world,	and	it	can	only	be	described	as	profound.

As	the	inner	shifts	occur,	our	lifestyle	may	or	may	not	show	a	change	to	the
external	observer.	However,	habits	and	behavior,	although	they	may	appear	to	be
the	same,	are	no	longer	compulsive	or	driven.	They	can	often	be	dropped,
altered,	or	changed	without	undue	discomfort.	On	the	other	hand,	there	may
indeed	be	sudden	changes	in	lifestyle,	including	major	shifts	in	vocation,
because	of	the	change	of	inner	values	and	expansion	of	interests	and	vision.	Now
that	we	are	connected	to	a	greater	dimension,	there	may	be	an	immersion	in	it
through	contemplation,	meditation,	art,	music,	movement,	reading,	writing,
teaching,	and	participation	in	spiritual	groups	with	similar	objectives.

Letting	go	now	becomes	more	automatic	and	continuous.	Periods	of	inner
stillness	and	beauty	begin	to	occur	with	greater	frequency	and	duration.	These
may	occur	at	a	very	profound	level.	Oddly,	they	may	follow	episodes	of	great
inner	turmoil	and	struggle.	These	periods	of	intense	inner	work	occur	because
we	can	no	longer	tolerate	negativity.	Now	that	we	have	greater	power	of
consciousness,	we	are	able	to	reach	down	and	handle	problems	at	the	deepest
levels	of	consciousness.	These	may	be	such	problems	as	those	concerning	the
source	of	our	identity	or	concept	of	self.

Breakthroughs	of	great	serenity	and	peace	may	also	occur	after	prolonged
periods	of	continual	surrender,	as	seen	in	the	following	example.	At	one	point,
being	in	a	state	of	constant	joy,	an	event	occurred	which	brought	to	awareness	a

conflict	that	stemmed	from	the	deepest	way	in	which	we	can	relate	to	others.	It
was	difficult	to	look	at	and	experience	out,	but	because	the	prevailing	state	had
so	much	high	energy	to	it,	it	was	possible	to	let	the	inner	conflict	come	up	and
let	it	run	its	course,	to	be	resolved	once	and	for	all.	It	ran	for	ten	solid	days,
unceasingly,	and	for	that	period	of	time,	the	approach	was	to	surrender
constantly	the	conflict	and	let	it	go	without	trying	to	alter	it	in	any	way.	For	a
while,	the	inner	conflict	seemed	as	if	it	would	be	unending;	however,	previous
experience	with	the	surrender	process	had	confirmed	that	every	feeling	sooner	or
later	runs	out,	if	we	just	keep	letting	it	go.

Moving	temporarily	to	a	small	cabin	in	the	middle	of	the	woods	intensified

the	process	because	there	were	no	other	distractions.	Then	the	source	of	the
conflict	deepened	and	even	more	painful	feelings	came	up	in	full	force.	There
was	a	great	deal	of	inner	turmoil,	at	times	almost	agony	and	despair.	Determined
not	to	give	up	or	allow	a	block	in	the	flow	of	the	process,	finally,	the	bottom	of
the	pit	was	reached	and	up	came	black	despair	of	overwhelming	intensity.	In
spite	of	this,	there	was	the	knowing	that	everything	would	be	okay,	because	the
primary	identification	was	not	with	the	despair	but	with	the	surrendering	itself.

Finally,	all	of	the	resistance	to	the	despair	was	totally	and	completely	let	go.

Instantly	it	vanished.	The	despair,	which	had	been	overwhelming	and	nearly
unbearable,	vanished	in	an	instant!	In	its	place,	there	was	profound	peace	beyond
description.	It	was	infinite	in	its	dimension,	curiously	powerful	and	totally
unassailable.	There	was	a	profound	inner	stillness,	and	all	perception	of	time
stopped.	Instead	of	“time,”	there	was	only	the	motion	of	the	phenomena	of	the
world	occurring.	The	next	day	the	experience	continued	and,	in	fact,	was	even
stronger.

Then,	out	of	curiosity,	there	was	a	re-entry	into	the	world	to	see	what	it
would	be	like	to	experience	ordinary	life	from	this	state	of	consciousness.	Even
while	walking	down	Fifth	Avenue	in	New	York	City,	the	same	profound
stillness,	harmony,	and	peace	prevailed.	This	pervasive	peace	and	stillness
seemed	to	underlie	all	of	the	superficial	chaos,	noise,	and	confusion	of	the	city.
It	was	as	though	the	power	and	strength	of	that	dimension	of	stillness	was	the
power	that	enabled	it	all	to	happen	and	held	it	all	together	in	one	continuous
unity.	Within	the	essence	of	that	stillness	was	unlimited	power,	and	it	was	clear
that	it	was	this	very	power	that	counteracted	and	balanced	the	collective
negativity	of	the	city.	As	without,	so	within.	Similarly,	it	was	clear	that	this	same
cohesive	power	is	that	which	also	counterbalances	the	negativity	of	the
personality.	If	unopposed,	that	negativity	would	destroy	the	person	and	the	body
with	it.

We	said	in	previous	sections	that	the	lower	emotions	are	associated	with	an

accumulation	of	energy	in	the	lower	energy	centers	of	the	body	called	“chakras.”
As	our	consciousness	rises,	due	to	the	letting	go	of	negativity,	this	energy	tends
to	rise	to	higher	centers	so	that,	at	the	level	of	love,	the	energy	has	moved	up	to
the	heart	chakra.	As	love	becomes	unconditional	and	ever-joyous,	the	personal
dimension	of	love	gives	way	to	universal	love.	In	general,	we	say	of	a	person
who	has	reached	the	level	of	love	that	they	are	“big-hearted”	or	“all	heart.”	This
phrase	expresses	the	shift	of	interest	and	focus	of	the	person’s	life	to	that	which
is	loving.	This	upward	shift	of	focus	is	accompanied	by	an	overall	change	of
perception,	a	different	point	of	view	than	that	which	characterizes	the	focus	of
attention	of	a	person	who	is	involved	in	the	negative	emotions.

For	example,	when	a	person	is	in	a	lower	state	of	mind,	an	old	gentleman
carelessly	dressed	standing	on	a	corner	would	be	perceived	as	a	“bum.”	With
that	characterization	goes	other	negative	thoughts	such	as:	“He	might	be
dangerous—let’s	avoid	him”;	“He’s	costing	us	taxpayers—he’s	probably	on
welfare”;	“The	police	ought	to	clear	the	streets	of	such	derelicts”;	“He	should	be
in	jail	or	in	a	mental	hospital.”

By	contrast,	the	person	who	is	in	a	loving	state	might	well	see	him	as	an
interesting	person	whose	face	reflects	a	lot	of	life	experience,	character,	and
wisdom.	He	might	appear	as	a	liberated	soul	who	has	pretty	much	finished	with
the	world	and	has	evolved	into	beingness,	beyond	doingness	and	havingness.

There	was	an	encounter	with	just	such	a	man	on	Fifth	Avenue,	while	in	that
state	of	total	inner	stillness	described	above.	While	walking	down	the	sidewalk,
the	old	gentleman	perceived	that	state	of	inner	stillness	with	one	glance	and,	in
return,	he	became	totally	open.	The	eyes	gazed	widely	such	that	nothing	was
hidden,	and	the	soul	became	completely	open	to	be	read.	It	was	apparent	that	he
was	a	man	who	had	realized	his	own	true	inner	Self	and	was	totally	at	peace.	He
was,	in	fact,	part	and	parcel	of	that	powerful,	positive,	loving	energy	that	was
holding	the	city	together.

With	that	glance	we	shared	our	oneness—our	timeless	oneness.	Though
strangers,	our	souls	were	united	and	resounded	with	each	other.	The	one	Self
radiated	forth.	That	oneness	was	the	energy	counteracting	the	total	negativity	of
New	York	City	at	that	moment.	In	our	open	gaze,	there	was	a	cosmic	oneness
(calibrates	as	true).	There	was	an	all-silent	knowingness	that	the	oneness
reflected	an	infinite	energy	that	was	counterbalancing	the	total	negativity	of	New
York	City	at	the	time,	because	the	power	that	was	shared	was	Infinite.	Without	a
counterbalance,	the	city	would	self-destruct.	It	was	a	silent,	prevailing,	infinite
state	of	consciousness.	It	was	a	profound	moment	in	which	one	of	the	laws	of
consciousness	was	experientially	verified:	Love	is	the	Ultimate	Law	of	the
Universe	(statement	calibrates	at	750).

CHAPTER

13

PEACE

In	peace,	there	is	no	longer	any	conflict.	There	is	a	total	absence	of	negativity
and	an	all-encompassing	lovingness	that	is	experienced	as	serenity,	tranquility,
timelessness,	completion,	fulfillment,	stillness,	and	contentment.	There	is	inner
quiet	and	light,	a	feeling	of	oneness,	unity,	and	total	freedom.	The	peace	is
imperturbable.	Actions	become	effortless,	spontaneous,	harmonious,	and	loving
in	their	effect.	There	is	a	shift	of	perception	of	the	universe	and	of	our
relationship	to	it.	The	inner	Self	prevails.	The	personal	self	has	been
transcended,	with	all	of	its	feelings,	beliefs,	identities,	and	concerns.	This	is	the
ultimate	state	sought	by	all	seekers,	whether	they	are	religious,	humanist,	or
have	no	spiritual	or	philosophical	identification	at	all.

The	Profound	Impact	of	Peace
We	have	all	had	moments	of	profound	peace	where	time	and	the	world	seemed
to	suddenly	stop,	and	we	have	come	in	contact	with	the	Infinite.	In	recent	years,
there	have	been	a	number	of	books	about	the	near-death	experience.	Under
various	circumstances,	this	experience	has	happened	to	people	who	have	died
and	then	returned	to	the	body.	Characteristically,	their	lives	have	been
transformed	by	the	experience,	and	they	never	forget	it.	Their	vision	of	the
world,	its	significance,	and	their	personal	significance	in	it	has	changed
considerably.

In	the	movie,	Lost	Horizon,	once	the	hero	had	experienced	Shangri-La,
although	he	returned	to	the	world	again,	he	viewed	it	in	a	totally	different	way.
He	longed,	at	any	cost,	to	return	to	Shangri-La	where	the	state	of	peace

	
prevailed.	Once	the	experience	of	peace	has	occurred,	we	are	no	longer	a	victim
of	the	world.	We	are	no	longer	at	its	effect	as	we	once	were,	for	we	have	had	a
glimpse	of	the	truth	about	it	and	of	what	we	really	are.

With	continual	surrender,	we	begin	to	experience	these	states	of	peace	with

ever-increasing	frequency.	At	times,	they	may	become	quite	profound	and	of
greater	and	greater	duration.	When	the	clouds	are	removed,	the	sun	shines	forth
and	we	discover	that	peace	was	the	truth	all	along.	Surrender	is	the	mechanism
that	uncovers	the	true	nature	of	our	existence.

When	a	person	is	in	the	state	of	peace,	they	test	strong	with	kinesiology,	and
nothing	makes	them	weak,	whether	it	is	mental,	emotional,	or	physical.	There	is
no	longer	identification	with	the	body	as	our	self,	and	physical	disorders	may	or
may	not	be	healed.	We	are	indifferent	to	them;	physical	concerns	have	lost	any
significant	meaning.

With	the	experience	of	inner	peace	comes	great	strength.	An	energy	field	of
total	peace	is	unassailable.	The	person	who	has	found	inner	peace	can	no	longer
be	intimidated,	controlled,	manipulated,	or	programmed.	In	this	state,	we	are
invulnerable	to	the	threats	of	the	world	and	have,	therefore,	mastered	earthly	life.
When	the	state	of	peace	has	become	established,	ordinary	human	suffering	is	no
longer	possible	because	the	very	basis	of	that	vulnerability	has	been	totally
relinquished.

Silent	Transmission
We	describe	the	person	who	has	reached	that	state	of	peace	as	“enlightened”	and
being	in	a	state	of	Grace.	Within	and	beyond	that	condition	are	various	advanced
states	of	illumination	and	levels	of	realization	described	by	the	mystics,	sages,
saints,	and	avatars.

There	is	a	silent,	nonverbal	benefit	of	being	in	the	actual	presence	of	an
enlightened	state.	Classically,	it	would	be	an	advanced	spiritual	teacher,	saint,	or
sage.	Seekers	travel	great	distances	to	be	in	the	physical	presence	of	this	energy
field.	The	devotee	or	seeker	receives	silent	transmission	of	the	high-frequency
energy	of	the	teacher’s	aura,	described	as	“Transmission	of	No-Mind,”	“Grace
of	the	Guru,”	or	“Benediction	of	the	Teacher.”	This	transmission	happens	of	its
own	and	is	not	personal.	The	state	of	infinite	peace	radiates	forth	unconditionally
of	its	own	from	the	energy	field	of	the	teacher	or	saint.	When	the	Buddha	gave
his	disciple	a	flower,	it	was	symbolic	of	the	transmission	of	the	energy.	If	we
have	been	in	the	presence	of	a	great	teacher	who	radiates	this	energy,	we	will
never	be	the	same.	The	most	beneficial	thing	that	can	happen	to	us	is	to	have
been	in	the	presence	of	a	great	teacher,	because	we	pick	up	the	vibration	by
being	in	the	physical	presence	of	that	state	of	peace	and	complete	surrender.	The

silent	transmission	of	this	realized	state	is	a	nonverbal,	energetic	phenomenon
that	does	not	depend	upon	logic	or	language.	The	vibration	that	is	within	the
aura	of	the	advanced	teacher	functions	as	a	carrier	wave	to	facilitate	our
comprehension	of	the	words	that	are	being	spoken.	But	it’s	the	wave	of	energy
and	not	the	words	that	are	the	catalytic	element.	Via	silent	transmission,	the
energy	from	the	advanced	teacher	or	saint	is	incorporated	into	our	aura,	our	brain
function,	and	our	whole	being.

It’s	because	this	energy	of	peace	is	transmitted	outward	into	the	world	that

mankind	is	still	alive.	It	would	have	destroyed	itself	a	long	time	ago	without	this
energy	to	counterbalance	it.	That’s	why	our	own	inner	evolution	serves	all	of
mankind.	By	reaching	these	higher	states	of	lovingness	and	peace	within
ourselves,	we	become	a	saving	presence	in	the	world.

Surrender	to	Ultimate	Reality
The	hallmark	of	this	level	is	desirelessness.	There	is	no	need	to	want	for
anything	because	everything	manifests	in	our	life	spontaneously	and
automatically,	without	conscious	will	or	effort.	Thoughts	held	in	mind	at	this
level	are	very	powerful	and	tend	to	manifest	rapidly.	The	phenomenon	of
synchronicity	is	continuous.	The	mechanisms	of	cause	and	effect	and	the	inner
working	of	the	universe	stand	forth	clearly	revealed,	as	we	are	now	witnessing
the	very	basis	of	Reality	itself.

These	very	high	states	of	awareness	happen	spontaneously	and

unexpectedly,	and	they	tend	to	recur	and	stay	for	longer	and	longer	durations.
Once	this	has	been	experienced,	our	intention	automatically	becomes	to	make
the	state	of	peace	permanent.

How	this	state	occurs	and	what	it	is	like	is	demonstrated	in	the	following
account,	which	describes	what	happened	after	three	and	a	half	years	of	continual
surrender.

It	was	a	cold	winter	day.	Surrender	was	continuous	for	eleven	straight	days

at	a	level	of	consciousness	that	had	never	been	reached	previously,	not	even
during	psychoanalysis.	It	had	to	do	with	the	ego’s	very	basis	of	survival	and	its
identification	as	an	individual.	It	had	to	do	with	how	we	experience	our	own
existence	and	the	desire	to	experience	our	own	beingness.

As	the	days	went	by,	the	process	seemed	endless.	A	doubt	surfaced,	“Was
this	attempting	the	impossible?”	It	became	clear	that	the	purpose	of	that	doubt
itself	was	a	defense	mechanism;	it	was	relinquished,	and	the	surrender	continued
at	great	depth.

Then,	entering	a	restaurant	on	that	cold	rainy	Sunday	afternoon,	sitting
down	alone	at	the	table,	suddenly	the	world	was	miraculously	transformed.	A

profound	sense	of	inner	stillness	and	peace	occurred.	It	was	greater	than
anything	imaginable.	The	experience	was	beyond	time.	In	fact,	time	had	no
meaning	whatsoever,	nor	did	space	exist	in	the	way	in	which	we	commonly
experience	it.	All	things	were	connected.	There	was	only	one	life	expressing
itself	with	one	Self	through	all	living	things.	There	was	no	identification	with	the
body	and	no	interest	in	it.	It	was	no	longer	any	more	interesting	than	any	other
body	in	the	room.	All	emotions	and	events	were	interconnected,	and	all
phenomena	occurred	because	each	thing	was	manifesting	its	own	inner	nature
spontaneously,	as	though	movement	and	growth	were	the	spontaneous	unfolding
of	potential.	There	was	a	rock-like	quality	to	the	imperturbable	stillness.	It	was
obvious	that	the	real	Self	was	invisible—without	beginning,	without	end—and
that	there	had	been	only	a	transitory	identification	with	the	body	and	the	story
that	went	with	the	identification	as	an	individual.

It	seemed	very	strange	that	one	could	previously	have	thought	that	one	was

an	isolated	body	separate	from	others,	with	a	limited	beginning	and	a	finite
ending.	The	thought	seemed	absurd.	There	was	no	longer	any	feeling	of	a
separate	self,	and	the	pronoun	“I”	disappeared	and	became	meaningless.	Instead,
there	was	the	awareness	of	being	all	things.	It	had	always	been	and	always
would	be.	True	beingness	stood	outside	of	time.	The	period	of	time	that	the	body
had	been	on	earth	seemed	like	a	split	second	during	which	the	truth	of	timeless
identity	had	been	forgotten,	due	to	being	blinded	by	the	smaller	self.	Then	how	it
had	happened	revealed	itself.	There	had	been	a	wishful	thought	to	experience
separate	existence,	and	this	wishful	thought	had	manifested	itself	as	the
individual	person	with	an	individual	identity	and	a	physical	body	to	go	with	it.
The	inner	connectedness	of	all	things	was	starkly	obvious.	It	was	the

holographic	universe	as	described	by	the	Buddha	and	by	modern	advanced
theoretical	physics,	both	of	whom	agree	as	to	the	intrinsic	nature	of	the	universe.
Because	everything	was	perfect,	there	was	nothing	to	wish	for,	nothing	to	desire,
nothing	to	create,	and	nothing	to	become.	There	was	only	That,	the	very	essence
of	Beingness	out	of	which	existence	arises.	That	Beingness	is	the	Source	of
existence,	yet	curiously	not	its	Cause.

There	was	a	profound	familiarity	to	the	awareness.	It	was	as	though	one	had

always	known	it,	as	if	one	were	home	at	last.	There	were	no	emotions	or
feelings.	There	was	an	unawareness	of	sensations.	Even	though	they	seemed	to
go	on,	they	were	no	longer	personal	or	of	concern.

By	way	of	experimentation,	a	thought	was	held	for	a	split-second	to	see
what	would	happen.	Almost	instantly	there	was	an	effect	in	the	physical	world.
The	thought	of	butter	or	coffee,	for	instance,	resulted	in	the	waiter’s	coming	over
immediately	with	the	items,	and	yet	no	word	had	been	spoken.	No	words	seemed

necessary.	Communication	occurred	with	anyone	on	a	level	of	silence.

The	body	drove	the	car	to	a	meeting	that	evening	where	no	one	noticed
anything	different.	Everyone	seemed	to	be	intensely	alive.	Their	aliveness	shown
forth	from	their	Beingness,	and	the	Self,	which	was	the	same	for	all,	shone	forth
through	their	eyes.	The	body	spoke	to	others,	spontaneously	carrying	on	normal
conversations	and	behaving	in	its	usual	way.	At	the	time,	the	body	seemed	like	a
karmic	wind-up	toy	run	by	all	of	its	accustomed	patterns	and	programs,	not
needing	any	attention	in	the	slightest.	It	seemed	to	know	what	to	do	and	did	it
very	effectively	and	effortlessly.	All	conversations	and	interactions	were	merely
witnessed	as	phenomena,	not	directed.	It	seemed	like	a	strange	vanity	to	have
once	believed	that	there	had	been	a	small	self	as	the	author	of	the	body’s	actions.
In	reality,	the	body	was	at	the	effect	of	the	universe,	and	there	had	never	been	a
doer	of	its	actions.	Phenomena	were	as	vibrations	of	the	mind	that	had	no
separate	existence	or	reality.	There	was	Allness	only.	Only	that	Oneness	actually
existed.

The	next	afternoon	a	thought	arose.	Now	that	the	way	to	Reality	had	been
revealed,	there	could	be	a	return	to	the	consciousness	of	being	that	individual
person,	which	had	formerly	been	accepted	as	real.	Just	as	the	air	in	the	room
does	not	experience	the	contents	of	the	room,	there	was	no	longer	an	“I”	that
experienced	“my	own	existence.”	In	that	space,	there	was	no	“I”	to	experience
the	“I	am.”	To	return	to	individual	consciousness	meant	that	a	choice	would
have	to	be	made.	In	truth,	the	choice	made	itself	for	there	was	no	“I”	to	make	a
decision.	The	desire	to	experience	the	individual	self	became	re-energized	on	its
own.	The	option	of	letting	it	go	was	present,	but	there	was	the	return	of	memory
of	things	yet	to	be	finished	in	the	world.	As	the	sense	of	“I”-ness	returned,	the
choices	were	witnessed,	not	actively	decided.	The	process	of	returning	was
taking	place.	It	could	be	allowed	or	it	could	be	let	go.	It	was	allowed,	and	so	the
process	of	return	continued.	When	the	next	morning	dawned,	the	return	was
complete,	but	now	with	a	different	sense	of	personal	identity.	The	truth	of	the
Self	had	been	revealed.	The	responsibility	for	having	chosen	to	experience	life
once	again	as	an	individual	was	accepted,	yet	without	being	at	the	effect	of	a
belief	in	individual	existence.	In	fact,	by	conscious	choosing,	there	was	complete
responsibility	for	it.	Experientially,	all	of	this	happened	autonomously.

At	one	time,	such	states	of	consciousness	as	the	above	were	considered	to

be	solely	the	province	of	the	mystic.	At	the	present	time,	however,	investigation
of	these	states,	and	the	information	obtainable	from	them,	is	considered	to	be	the
leading	edge	of	science,	especially	that	branch	of	physics	concerned	with
quantum	mechanics	and	high-energy	subatomic	particles.	Investigations	of	these
particles	indicate	that	they	are	not	things	in	the	usual	sense	but	are	actually

events	that	occur	as	a	result	of	energy	frequencies.	Science	now	postulates	a
transcendent	frequency	beyond	space	and	time.	An	impressive	body	of	research
in	many	laboratories	has	demonstrated	that	the	brain	perceives	by	sophisticated
mathematical	analysis	of	frequency	patterns.	These	findings	have	resulted	in	the
so-called	holographic	paradigm,	which	states	that	everything	in	the	universe	is
connected	with	everything	else,	including	the	human	mind.	In	the	hologram,
each	part	contains	the	whole.	Consequently,	each	individual	mind	is	capable	of
reflecting	the	entire	universe.	This	relationship	between	consciousness	and
science	constitutes	a	whole	field	in	which	there	is	rapidly	growing	interest,	as	is
indicated	by	the	publishing	of	such	books	as	The	Holographic	Paradigm,
Wholeness	and	the	Implicate	Order,	The	Tao	of	Physics,	The	Dancing	Wu-Li
Masters,	Mindful	Universe,	Psychoenergetic	Science	and	the	publication	of
articles	with	titles	such	as	“Field	Consciousness	and	the	New	Perspective	on
Reality,”	“The	Enfolding-Unfolding	Universe,”	“The	Holographic	Model,”
“Physics	and	Mysticism,”	and	“The	Medium,	the	Mystic,	and	the	Physicist.”
Leading	among	these	researchers	are	neuroscientist	Carl	Pribram	of
Stanford	University	and	the	late	physicist	David	Bohm	of	the	University	of
London,	whose	theories	can	be	summarized:	Our	brains	mathematically
construct	concrete	reality	by	interpreting	frequencies	from	another	dimension,	a
realm	of	meaningful,	patterned,	primary	reality	that	transcends	time	and	space.
The	brain	is,	therefore,	a	hologram	interpreting	a	holographic	universe.

It	is	interesting	that	the	theories	of	advanced	theoretical	physics,	which	are
the	product	of	so-called	left-brain	activities,	now	require	a	new	context	in	order
to	be	comprehended.	The	context	that	is	evolving	from	these	left-brain	scientific
researchers	matches	Reality	as	witnessed	by	the	mystic,	who	represents	right-
brain	function.	Thus,	whichever	side	of	the	mountain	we	choose	to	climb,	we
end	up	at	the	same	point:	the	peak.

A	third	way	up	the	mountain	is	through	the	mechanism	of	surrender,	and
each	of	us,	therefore,	has	the	opportunity	to	verify	for	ourselves	the	ultimate
nature	of	Reality	itself,	which	is	the	same	as	that	revealed	to	the	mystic	or	the
physicist.	We	can	envision	that	with	each	and	every	surrender,	we	take	another
step	up	the	side	of	the	mountain.	Some	of	us	will	ascend	until	the	view	gets
better	and	choose	to	stop	there.	Others	will	go	still	higher.	And,	then,	there	will
be	those	of	us	who	will	not	be	satisfied	until	we	have	reached	the	very	Peak	and
verified	It	for	ourselves,	although,	at	that	point,	there	is	no	longer	an	individual
person	to	verify	anything,	for	it	has	been	surrendered	completely.

CHAPTER

14

REDUCING	STRESS	AND	PHYSICAL
ILLNESS

Psychological	Aspects	and	Stress	Proneness
Though	available	to	all	of	us,	the	state	of	peace	is	reached	by	very	few	people.
The	inner	experience	of	most	people	is	marked	by	constant	stress.	Most	of	the
stress	that	results	in	emotional	and	physical	disorders	in	our	society	is
psychological	in	origin.	Our	response	to	stress	depends	on	our	“stress	proneness”
and,	as	we	pointed	out	earlier,	this	is	directly	the	result	of	the	amount	of
suppressed	and	repressed	feelings	we	have	accumulated.	The	more	emotional
pressure	that	is	surrendered	and	let	go,	the	less	vulnerable	we	are	to	the	stress
response	and	stress-related	diseases.

The	main	stress	to	the	majority	of	us	most	of	the	time	is	not	due	to	external
stimuli,	but	to	the	pressure	of	our	own	suppressed	emotions.	These	suppressed
emotions	become	the	primary	stressor	so	that,	even	in	a	calm	external
environment,	we	are	still	subject	to	chronic,	internal	stress.

We	can	observe	that	the	external	stress	factors	are	merely	the	straws	that
eventually	break	the	camel’s	back.	The	main	stress	load	is	what	we	carry	around
with	us	all	the	time.	The	psychological	programming	in	our	society	is	so
extensive	that,	for	most	people,	even	relaxing	and	enjoying	a	vacation	is	a
problem.	(Guilt	says	we	“should”	be	doing	something	else.)	There	is
disappointment	when	immediate	relaxation	does	not	occur.	There	is	restlessness
and	the	endless	pursuit	of	“fun”	activities	to	avoid	the	pain	of	facing	our	own
inner	self.	Most	busy	executives	begin	to	secretly	look	forward	to	getting	back	to

	
work	while	they	are	on	vacation.	They	may	outwardly	grumble	about	their	heavy
workload,	but	when	they	return	to	the	accustomed	routine,	they	feel	normal
again.

The	effects	of	suppressed	and	repressed	feelings	plus	stress-precipitating
factors	are	responsible	for	most	emotional	and	physical	illnesses.	There	is	an
emotional-psychological	component	in	all	diseases	and,	because	of	this,	it	is
possible	to	reverse	the	disease	process	by	removing	the	internal	stress	factors.
This	accounts	for	the	many	recoveries,	reported	daily,	from	serious	and
potentially	fatal	illnesses	by	the	use	of	emotional-spiritual	techniques.	Many
cures	take	place	after	all	medical	methods	have	failed.	One	reason	is	that,	at	this
stage	of	“there’s	nothing	else	we	can	do,”	the	patients	give	up,	and	they	seek	and
accept	the	true	basic	nature	and	cause	of	their	illness.

Acknowledging	and	letting	go	of	suppressed	feelings	progressively	reduces
a	person’s	personal	stress	proneness,	thereby	lowering	the	vulnerability	to	stress-
related	problems	and	illnesses.	Most	people	who	learn	and	practice	the	letting	go
technique	notice	a	progressive	improvement	in	physical	health	and	vitality.

Medical	Aspects	of	Stress
Stress	is	our	response	to	a	perceived	threat	(real	or	imaginary)	to	our	security	or
bodily	equilibrium.	The	stimulus	may	be	internal	or	external.	It	may	be	physical,
mental,	or	emotional.	Basic	research	into	the	body’s	physical	response	to	stress
was	done	by	Dr.	Hans	Selye	and	Dr.	Walter	Cannon.	Selye	described	what	he
called	the	“general	adaptation	syndrome.”	In	response	to	a	stressful	stimulus,	the
body	first	goes	through	an	alarm	reaction,	then	secondly	a	stage	of	resistance,
and	if	the	stimulus	continues,	it	may	result	in	the	third	stage	of	exhaustion
syndrome.

	blood	stream	(cortisol	and

The	alarm	reaction	occurs	via	the	pathway	of	the	cerebral	cortex	
	adrenal	glands	

hypothalamus	(lower	brain)	
adrenalin).	In	addition,	there	is	the	release	of	brain	hormones	and	stimulation	of
the	body’s	sympathetic	nervous	system.	The	adrenalin	then	goes	to	all	of	the
body’s	organs	and	prepares	them	for	fight	or	flight.	Many	people,	especially	in
big	cities,	learn	to	live	off	the	adrenalin	“high”	of	constant	challenges.	The	threat
to	survival	of	the	intense	competition	keeps	the	adrenalin	flowing.	Typically,
they	get	depressed	on	weekends	or	vacations.	They	are	addicted	to	excitement
and	abnormal	stimulation.	They	get	used	to	the	semi-euphoria	induced	by	the
high	levels	of	cortisol.

The	second	stage,	that	of	resistance,	is	the	body’s	attempt	to	restore

homeostatic	balance.	It	involves	hormonal	changes	and	shifts	in	metabolism	and
mineral	balance.	Commonly,	there	is	sodium,	accompanied	by	water	retention	in

the	tissues.	Some	executives,	for	instance,	develop	swollen	ankles	as	the	week
goes	on,	and	then	on	Friday	evening	they	have	frequency	of	urination.	They
complain	of	a	letdown	due	to	the	sudden	decrease	in	the	level	of	the	cortisol
hormone.	In	addition	to	a	somewhat	euphoric	effect,	cortisol	also	has	an
anesthetic	effect;	therefore,	during	the	letdown	period	of	low-cortisol
production,	weekenders	may	notice	physical	symptoms	that	were	ignored	during
the	excitement	of	the	work	week,	and	they	may	complain	of	many	aches	and
pains	over	the	weekend	that	weren’t	experienced	while	at	work.

The	third	stage	is	exhaustion.	If	stress	continues	unabated	beyond	the
capacity	of	the	body’s	coping	mechanisms,	eventually	they	begin	to	fail.	The
state	of	adrenal	exhaustion	sets	in.	The	body’s	defenses	have	become	too	weak
to	counter	the	effects	of	stress.	There	is	suppression	of	the	immune	system.	The
body’s	organs	begin	to	show	pathologic	changes	due	to	the	long	exposure	to
stress	hormones.	The	body’s	energy	stores	have	become	depleted,	leading
eventually	to	disease,	and	finally	death	of	the	organism.

During	the	acute	alarm	reaction,	the	stomach’s	motility	halts,	digestion

stops,	and	the	blood	supply	to	the	stomach’s	lining	is	decreased.	As	stress
continues,	due	to	imbalance	of	the	nervous	system	and	hormone	changes,
hyperacidity	and	over-production	of	digestive	enzymes	occur.	The	heightened
digestive	enzymes	and	hydrochloric	acid,	acting	on	the	weakened
gastrointestinal	lining,	result	in	ulceration,	producing	stress	ulcers.	With
continued	stress,	the	ulcers	may	hemorrhage	or	perforate	and	precipitate	a
medical	catastrophe.	In	other	cases,	the	reaction	to	chronic,	abnormal	stress	may
be	failure	to	produce	hydrochloric	acid	or	enzymes,	resulting	in	chronic
indigestion	and	poor	nutrition.

Besides	the	gastrointestinal	tract,	the	cardiovascular	system	also	reacts	to

stress	by	an	alarm	reaction.	As	the	stress	becomes	chronic,	the	heart,	blood
vessels,	and	kidneys	may	go	through	damage	resulting	in	hypertension	and/or
coronary	disease.	The	stress	is	eventually	responsible	for	strokes,	heart	attacks,
and	hypertension,	all	of	which	are	major	causes	of	death	in	the	United	States.

Energy	System	Response	to	Stress	and	the	Acupuncture	System
The	body	has	three	nervous	systems:	1)	the	voluntary	network	of	nerves	under
conscious	control	and	distributed	primarily	to	voluntary	muscles;	2)	the
involuntary	or	autonomic	nervous	system	(sympathetic	and	parasympathetic),
which	is	usually	unconscious	and	which	controls	the	body’s	organs	and
physiological	functions,	such	as	heart	beat,	blood	flow	and	distribution,
digestion,	and	body	chemistries;	3)	the	acupuncture	system,	which	transmits	the
bio-energy	to	all	the	body’s	structures	and	internal	organs.	This	third	system	is

least	known	in	Western	medicine	but	long	understood	in	Eastern	medicine	and
society.

In	the	acupuncture	system,	there	is	a	flow	of	vital	energies	throughout	the
physical	body	via	the	body’s	invisible	energy	blueprint.	This	energy	system	is
described	as	having	12	main	channels	over	the	surface	of	the	physical	body,
down	the	twelve	major	acupuncture	meridians.	From	these	channels,	there	are
many	tributaries	leading	into	the	body’s	various	organ	systems.	Abnormal
distribution	of	energy	into	these	meridians	results	in	dysfunction	of	the	affected
organs	and	eventually	the	evolvement	of	the	disease	process.

This	vital	bio-energy	is	the	very	flow	of	life	itself.	It	is	very	quickly	reactive
to	stress.	This	bio-energy	reacts	from	instant	to	instant	due	to	fluctuating	factors
in	our	lives,	which	are	the	changing	patterns	of	our	perceptions,	thoughts,	and
feelings.	The	conventional	measurement	of	the	body’s	medical	reactions	is
relatively	slow.	A	fleeting	thought,	which	may	be	accompanied	by	an	emotional
pang,	does	not	bring	about	a	measurable	change	in	the	body’s	blood	pressure	or
pulse	in	response;	however,	it	instantly	registers	in	the	bioenergy	system	where	a
variety	of	rapid	changes	can	be	observed	by	scientific,	psychic,	and	clinical
methods.

The	overall	balance	of	the	body’s	acupuncture	energy	system	is	regulated	by

the	activity	of	the	thymus	gland.	The	bio-energy	system	is	intimately	connected
to	the	body’s	immune	system	via	the	thymus	gland.	Chronic	stress	weakens	the
body’s	immune	system,	suppresses	the	thymus	gland,	and	throws	the	bioenergy
system	out	of	balance.	Strengthening	the	thymus	gland	or	taking	thymus
supplements	rebalances	the	bio-energy	system.	An	extensive	explanation	of	this
is	found	in	the	books	Behavioral	Kinesiology	and	Life	Energy	by	John
Diamond,	M.D.

Interventions	to	Alleviate	Stress
Research	at	U.C.L.A.	by	Liebeskind	and	Shavit	during	the	1980s	further
clarified	the	relationship	among	stress,	suppression	of	the	immune	system,	and
the	development	of	cancer	by	showing	the	intermittent	stress	on	the	release	of
the	brain	opiates	known	as	endorphins.	Stress	in	the	form	of	intermittent	shocks
suppresses	the	immune	system.	When	the	immune	response	is	strong,	there	is	the
release	of	the	brain’s	endorphins,	so-called	anti-cancer	“killer”	cells,	which
attack	and	kill	young	growing	tumor	cells.	But	when	the	immune	activity	is
suppressed	and	there	is	a	reduced	presence	of	endorphins,	the	activity	of	the	anti-
cancer	“killer”	cells	diminishes.

The	report	in	Science	(223:	188–190)	states,	“Our	findings	support	the	view
that	the	central	nervous	system	by	modulating	immune	function	exercises	some

measure	of	control	over	the	inception	and	development	of	disease.”	The	report
goes	on	to	say	that	a	feeling	of	helplessness	has	been	related	to	reduced	anti-
cancer	killer	cell	activity	and	increased	tumor	growth.	Depression	in	animals,	as
well	as	humans,	lowers	the	immune	response,	and	this	helplessness	has	to	do
with	how	much	control	the	person	and	the	animal	feel	they	have	over	stressful
events.	Those	findings	help	explain	why	depression	and	a	sense	of	helplessness
are	associated	with	cancer.	Further	research	confirms	that	the	stress	response
was	found	to	be	a	principal	precondition	for	physical	illness	in	animals	and
humans	(Sapolsky,	2010).

The	overall	effect	of	stress	on	the	immune	system	results	in	the	blocking	of
the	body’s	immune	system	because	of	the	production	of	auto-antibodies.	If	these
auto-antibodies	are	themselves	blocked,	the	immune	function	resumes	once
again.	Therefore,	the	blocking	of	the	immune	system	is	reversible.	For	example,
research	done	at	the	Pasteur	Institute	in	Paris	has	resulted	in	the	so-called
Bogomoletz	serum	which,	when	injected	intradermally,	results	in	reactivation	of
the	immune	system.	This	treatment	is	called	the	I.B.R.	(Immuno-Biologic-
Rejuvenation)	treatment.	A	small	amount	of	serum	is	injected	within	the	skin	on
three	successive	days	and	results	in	rapid	reactivation	of	the	immune	system.
Reactivation	of	pro-health	body	responses	is	also	seen	in	non-medical

interventions,	as	in	the	correlation	of	meditation	practice	with	a	reduction	in
stress	and	depression.	Research	done	on	college	students,	for	example,	found
that	meditation	led	to	a	decrease	in	their	inflammatory	stress	reaction,	which	was
linked	to	the	alleviation	of	their	depression.	The	study	found	that	students	who
participated	faithfully	in	a	six-week	meditation	training	experienced	improved
immune	system	functioning.	The	students	in	a	control	group,	who	received	only
educational	information	about	stress	without	the	inner	technique,	showed	little	to
no	physiological	or	psychological	improvement	(Pace	et	al,	2009).

Unpublished	research	studies	during	the	1980s,	for	which	I	served	as

clinical	advisor,	showed	a	greater	effectiveness	of	inner	techniques	in	contrast	to
purely	medical	methods	of	stress	reduction.	The	medical	methods	such	as
progressive	relaxation	have	a	positive	effect;	however,	the	ameliorative	effect	on
heart	rate	and	blood	pressure	is	greater	and	more	sustainable	if	inner
mechanisms	are	consciously	applied.

These	scientific	results	will	not	be	surprising	to	people	who	have	learned	to

use	inner	technologies	such	as	the	letting	go	technique,	which	is	a	process	of
internal	surrender	that	can	be	applied	to	any	and	all	situations.	They	report	that
they	are	better	able	to	handle	stress	because	they	are	calmer	in	difficult	situations
after	learning	how	to	let	go	of	negative	feelings	as	the	feelings	arise.

Kinesiologic	Testing
Kinesiology	or	muscle-testing	is	a	rewarding	subject	for	studying	the	direct
relationship	between	the	mind	and	the	body.	The	basic	testing	procedure	is	now
relatively	widely	known	and	is	both	highly	informative	and	simple	to	learn.
Diagnosticians	use	kinesiologic	methods	to	test	the	balance	of	the	acupuncture
system,	the	acupuncture	meridians,	and	the	overall	functioning	of	the	body’s
bio-energy	system.

Kinesiology	deals	primarily	with	muscle-testing,	as	sudden	drops	in	bio-

energy	are	indicated	by	rapid	weakening	of	the	body’s	musculature.	This
response	can	be	elicited	by	any	negative	energy	that	comes	within	the	aura
(vicinity)	of	the	bio-energy	system.	The	stimulus	may	be	physical,	such	as
artificial	sweeteners,	fluorescent	lights,	synthetic	foods	and	fabrics,	and	certain
rhythms	produced	by	heavy	metal	or	rap	music	groups.	The	most	notable
stimulus	for	our	understanding	is,	however,	the	immediate	weakening	effect	of	a
negative	thought	or	feeling.	A	negative	thought	or	feeling	instantly	weakens	the
body	and	creates	an	imbalance	of	the	body’s	energy	flow.

Because	this	kind	of	muscle-testing	so	beautifully	and	dramatically

illustrates	the	connection	between	mind	and	body,	it	is	worth	the	effort	to	know
of	the	procedure	and	to	experience	it	personally;	therefore,	we	will	go	into	some
detail	about	the	testing	procedure	itself,	which	is	extremely	simple	and	requires
only	two	persons.	It	is	important	to	note	that	both	the	tester	and	the	one	being
tested	must	be	over	the	consciousness	level	of	courage	(calibration	of	200)	in
order	to	obtain	accurate	responses	from	the	testing	procedure	(see	Appendix	B);
that	is,	those	who	are	dedicated	to	truth	are	shown	the	truth.

Kinesiologic	Testing	Technique
The	test	subject	stands	with	one	arm	stretched	out	to	the	side	and	raised	to
shoulder	height.	The	second	person	serves	as	a	tester.	Using	two	fingers,	the
tester	presses	down	quickly	for	a	few	seconds	on	the	back	of	the	testee’s	wrist	to
get	a	feel	for	muscle	strength.	At	the	same	time	that	the	tester	presses	down,	he
asks	the	test	subject	to	resist	with	all	his	strength.	It	is	important	in	doing	this
that	the	tester	does	not	smile	at	the	subject,	and	there	should	be	no	talking	or
music	at	that	moment.	It	is	best	to	have	the	test	subject	view	a	neutral	object
such	as	a	blank	wall	or	shut	the	eyes.	After	several	trials,	the	tester	will	get	a	feel
of	the	strength	of	the	subject’s	muscles.

For	the	demonstration,	simply	have	the	subject	think	of	an	emotionally
unpleasant	situation	or	hold	in	mind	an	unpleasant	person.	While	the	subject
holds	that	unpleasant	thought	in	mind,	the	tester	presses	down	again	for	a	few

seconds	to	test	the	strength	of	the	subject’s	arm,	which	is	still	being	held	out
horizontally.	At	the	same	time,	the	test	subject	again	resists	with	all	his	strength.
It	will	be	observed	dramatically	that	there	is	a	sudden	major	weakening	of	the
deltoid	muscle	which,	with	testing,	will	indicate	a	loss	of	about	50%	of	muscle
strength.

Now	have	the	subject	think	of	someone	he	loves	and	re-test.	He	will

instantly	go	strong.	This	is	a	dramatic	and	highly	valuable	phenomenon	to
experience	and	witness.	The	test	can	be	repeated	with	various	negative	objects
held	in	the	subject’s	other	hand,	in	their	mouth,	or	placed	on	the	crown	of	their
head	or	at	the	solar	plexus.	To	do	this,	have	the	subject	look	at	a	fluorescent	light
or	a	television	commercial	at	the	moment	of	testing,	or	test	the	difference
between	the	effect	of	classical	music	versus	heavy	metal	or	rap	music;
homemade	bread	versus	machine-made	bread;	sugar	versus	honey;	synthetic
fabrics	versus	cotton,	wool	or	silk;	junk	food	versus	organic	health	food;
synthetic	vitamin	C	versus	organic	rose	hips	vitamin	C.	Additional	tests	can	be
done	for	individual	reactions	to	diet	sodas,	cigarettes,	soaps,	favorite	foods,	and
other	objects	with	which	we	come	into	frequent	contact.

As	various	objects	and	the	effects	of	thoughts	and	feelings	are	tested,	it	soon

becomes	obvious	that	everything	in	the	universe	has	a	vibration	and	that	the
vibration	has	a	strengthening	or	weakening	effect.	For	instance,	to	demonstrate
the	weakening	effect	of	a	negative	energy	food	such	as	artificial	sweeteners,	it	is
not	necessary	to	place	the	food	in	the	mouth.	It	will	have	the	same	weakening
effect	if	placed	in	the	opposite	hand	or	on	the	top	of	the	head.

When	a	person	uses	the	mechanism	of	surrender	and	lets	go	of	a	negative
feeling,	the	muscle	testing	we	have	described	will	change	from	weak	to	strong.
As	negative	thoughts	or	belief	systems	are	surrendered,	they	no	longer	have	the
power	to	deplete	our	energy.

This	is	a	basic	law	of	consciousness:	We	are	subject	only	to	what	we	hold
in	mind.	The	body	will	respond	to	what	we	believe.	If	we	believe	that	a	certain
substance	is	bad	for	us,	then	it	will	usually	test	weak	with	muscle	testing.	The
same	substance	will	make	another	person	who	believes	that	it	is	good	for	them
strong.	What	is	stressful	to	us,	therefore,	is	primarily	subjective.	Muscle	testing
is	responsible	to	unconscious	belief	systems	as	well	as	conscious	ones.	Testing
often	reveals	that	a	person	unconsciously	feels	or	believes	the	opposite	of	what
they	think	they	consciously	believe.	The	person,	for	example,	may	consciously
believe	they	want	to	heal	but	unconsciously	be	attached	to	the	payoffs	of	illness.
A	simple	muscle	test	reveals	the	truth	of	the	matter.

The	Relationship	of	Consciousness	to	Stress	and	Disease

As	we	have	seen,	stress	proneness	and	vulnerability	are	directly	related	to	our
general	level	of	emotional	functioning.	The	higher	we	are	on	the	scale	of
consciousness,	the	less	we	respond	with	stressful	reaction.	We	can	take	a	simple
incident	from	everyday	life	and	illustrate	the	differences	in	reactivity.

Let’s	say,	for	example,	that	we	have	parked	our	car	and,	just	as	we	get	out,
the	car	parked	in	front	of	us	backs	up	into	our	car	with	a	thud.	Our	bumper	and
the	front	of	the	fender	are	dented.	Here	is	what	the	different	levels	of
consciousness	might	sound	like:

Shame:	“How	embarrassing.	I’m	such	a	lousy	driver.	I	can’t	even	park	a	car.	I’ll
never	amount	to	anything.”

Guilt:	“I	had	it	coming.	How	stupid	I	am!	I	should	have	done	a	better	job	of
parking.”

Apathy:	“What’s	the	use?	Things	like	this	always	happen	to	me.	I	probably
won’t	collect	on	the	insurance	anyway.	There’s	no	use	talking	to	the	guy.	He’ll
just	sue	me.	Life	stinks.”

Grief:	“Now	the	car	is	ruined.	It	will	never	be	the	same.	Life	is	grim.	I	will
probably	lose	a	bundle	on	this	one.”

Fear:	“This	guy	is	probably	furious.	I’m	afraid	he’ll	hit	me.	I’m	afraid	to	talk
back	to	him.	He’ll	probably	sue	me.	I’ll	probably	never	get	the	car	fixed	right
again.	Car	repair	people	always	rip	me	off.	The	insurance	company	will
probably	get	out	of	this	one,	and	I’ll	be	the	one	left	holding	the	bag.”

Desire:	“I	can	make	a	bundle	on	this	one.	I	think	I	will	hold	my	neck	and	fake	a
whiplash.	My	brother-in-law	is	a	lawyer.	We’ll	sue	the	pants	off	this	idiot.	I’ll
get	a	settlement	on	the	highest	estimate	and	get	it	fixed	at	a	cheaper	place.”

Anger:	“The	damned	idiot!	I	think	I’ll	teach	this	guy	a	lesson.	He	deserves	a
good	punch	in	the	nose.	I’ll	sue	his	pants	off	and	make	him	suffer.	My	blood	is
boiling.	I	feel	shaky	with	rage.	I	could	kill	the	bastard!”

Pride:	“Look	where	you’re	going,	you	fool!	Oh	God!	The	world	is	full	of	such
bumbling	idiots!	How	dare	he	damage	my	new	car!	Who	the	hell	does	he	think
he	is?	He’s	probably	got	cheap	insurance;	thank	God	mine	is	the	best.”

Courage:	“Oh,	well,	we’ve	both	got	insurance.	I’ll	take	down	the	data	and	handle
it	okay.	A	nuisance	but	I	can	handle	it.	I’ll	talk	to	the	driver	and	get	it	settled	out
of	court.”

Neutrality:	“These	things	happen	in	life.	You	can’t	drive	20,000	miles	a	year
without	an	occasional	fender	bender.”

Willingness:	“How	can	I	help	the	guy	calm	down?	He	doesn’t	need	to	feel	upset
about	it.	We’ll	just	exchange	the	necessary	insurance	information	and	be	okay
with	each	other.”

Acceptance:	“It	could	have	been	worse.	At	least	nobody’s	hurt.	It’s	only	money
anyway.	The	insurance	company	will	take	care	of	it.	I	suppose	the	guy’s	upset.
That’s	only	natural.	Such	things	just	can’t	be	helped.	Thank	God	I’m	not	running
this	universe.	It’s	only	a	minor	nuisance.”

Reason:	“Let’s	be	practical	here.	I’d	like	to	take	care	of	it	as	quickly	as	possible
so	I	can	get	on	with	the	day’s	activities.	What’s	the	most	efficient	way	to	resolve
our	problem?”

Love:	“I	hope	the	guy	isn’t	upset.	I’ll	calm	him	down.	(Says	to	the	other	driver),
‘Relax.	It’s	all	okay.	We’ve	both	got	insurance.	I	know	how	it	is.	It	happened	to
me	just	the	same	way.	It	was	a	minor	dent	and	we	got	it	fixed	in	a	day.	Don’t
worry—we	won’t	report	it	if	you	don’t	want	to.	We	can	probably	deduct	it	and
avoid	a	raise	in	the	insurance	premium.	There’s	nothing	to	be	upset	about.’”
(Reassures	the	upset	driver,	putting	an	arm	on	his	shoulder	in	fellow	human
camaraderie.)

Peace:	“Well,	isn’t	that	fortuitous?	I	was	going	to	have	the	rattle	in	the	bumper
fixed,	anyway,	and	the	fender	already	had	a	little	dent.	So	now	I’ll	get	it	fixed
for	nothing.	‘Say,	aren’t	you	George’s	brother-in-law?	You’re	just	the	guy	I
wanted	to	see.	I	have	some	great	business	that	I	think	you	can	handle	for	me.
We’ll	both	benefit.	You	look	like	the	right	person	to	research	it	for	us.	How
about	a	cup	of	coffee	and	we	can	talk	it	over?	By	the	way,	here’s	my	insurance
card.	Say,	that’s	the	same	company	as	yours.	What	a	coincidence.	Everything	is
working	out	for	the	best.	No	problem.’”	(Walks	off	humming	with	new	friend,
the	incident	already	forgotten.)

The	above	illustrates	all	that	we	have	been	saying.	It	is	we	ourselves	who
create	stressful	reactions	as	a	consequence	of	what	we	are	holding	within	us.	The
suppressed	feelings	determine	our	belief	systems	and	our	perception	of	ourselves
and	others.	These,	in	turn,	literally	create	events	and	incidents	in	the	world,
events	that	we,	then,	turn	around	and	blame	for	our	reactions.	This	is	a	self-
reinforcing	system	of	illusions.	This	is	what	the	enlightened	sages	mean	when
they	say,	“We	are	all	living	in	an	illusion.”	All	that	we	experience	are	our	own

thoughts,	feelings,	and	beliefs	projected	onto	the	world,	actually	causing	what
we	see	to	happen.

Most	people	have	experienced	all	the	different	levels	of	consciousness	at

one	time	or	another	but,	in	general,	we	tend	to	operate	primarily	at	one	level	or
another	for	long	periods	of	time.	Most	people	are	preoccupied	with	survival	in
all	its	subtle	forms,	and	so	they	reflect	primarily	fear,	anger,	and	a	desire	for
gain.	They	have	not	learned	that	the	state	of	lovingness	is	the	most	powerful	of
all	survival	tools.

Interestingly,	as	we	said	in	an	earlier	chapter,	having	a	pet	dog	can	lengthen

a	human	life	by	10	years.	The	love,	affection,	caring	for	another	being,	and
companionship	that	go	along	with	having	a	dog	mitigate	the	negative	effects	of
stress.	Love	stimulates	endorphins	and	life	energy,	bringing	a	healing	balm	to
stress-prone	lives.

CHAPTER

15

RELATIONSHIP	BETWEEN	MIND	AND
BODY

The	Influence	of	Mind
The	basic	dictum	to	comprehend	is	that	the	body	obeys	the	mind;	therefore,	the
body	tends	to	manifest	what	the	mind	believes.	The	belief	may	be	held
consciously	or	unconsciously.	This	dictum	follows	from	the	law	of
consciousness	that	states:	We	are	only	subject	to	what	we	hold	in	mind.	The
only	power	that	anything	has	over	us	is	the	power	of	belief	that	we	give	it.	By
“power,”	we	mean	energy	and	the	will	to	believe.

If	we	look	at	the	Map	of	Consciousness	(see	Appendix	A),	it’s	easy	to	see

why	the	mind	is	more	powerful	than	the	body.	The	energy	field	of	reason
(calibrates	at	400),	with	its	beliefs	and	concepts	of	the	mind,	is	more	powerful
than	the	energy	field	of	the	physical	body	(calibrates	at	200).	Thus,	the	body	will
express	the	beliefs	held	in	mind,	consciously	or	unconsciously.

Our	proneness	to	accept	negative	beliefs	depends	on	how	much	negativity

we	are	holding	in	the	first	place.	A	positive	mind,	for	example,	will	refuse	to
accept	negative	thoughts	and	simply	reject	them	as	untrue	for	oneself.	There	is	a
refusal	to	buy	into	commonly	held	negative	ideas.	We	know	how	easy	it	is	to	sell
self-condemnation	to	a	guilt-ridden	person	or	fear	of	some	disease	to	a	fearful
person.

The	idea,	for	instance,	that	“colds	are	catching”	is	a	good	example.	The
thought	that	“everybody’s	got	a	cold”	will	be	subscribed	to	by	a	person	who	has
sufficient	guilt,	fear,	and	naïveté	regarding	the	laws	of	consciousness.	Because

	
of	unconscious	guilt,	a	person	unconsciously	feels	that	they	“deserve”	a	cold.
The	body	obeys	the	mind’s	belief	that	colds	are	caused	by	viruses,	which	are
“catching”	and	contagious.	Thus,	the	body,	which	is	controlled	by	the	mind’s
belief,	manifests	the	cold.	The	person	who	has	let	go	of	the	underlying	negative
energies	of	guilt	and	fear	does	not	have	a	fearful	mind	that	believes,	“A	cold	is
going	around;	I’ll	probably	get	it	like	everybody	else.”

These	are	the	dynamics	behind	disease.	The	mechanisms	are	carried	out

through	the	mind-induced	alterations	in	the	energy	flow	of	the	bio-energy
system	and	through	the	spillover	of	suppressed	energy	into	the	autonomic
nervous	system.

Thought	is	powerful	because	it	has	a	high	rate	of	vibration.	A	thought	is
actually	a	thing;	it	has	an	energy	pattern.	The	more	energy	we	give	it,	the	more
power	it	has	to	manifest	itself	physically.	This	is	the	paradox	of	much	so-called
health	education.	The	paradoxical	effect	is	that	fearful	thoughts	are	reinforced
and	given	so	much	power	that	epidemics	are	actually	created	by	the	media	(e.g.,
the	swine	flu).	The	fear-based	“warnings”	about	health	dangers	actually	set-up
the	mental	environment	in	which	the	very	thing	that	is	feared	will	occur.

Superimposed	around	the	physical	body	is	an	energy	body	whose	form	is
very	much	like	that	of	the	physical	body	and	whose	patterns	actually	control	the
physical	body.	This	control	is	at	the	level	of	thought	or	intention.	Advanced	sub-
atomic	quantum	physics	has	shown,	similarly,	that	observation	influences
subatomic	high-energy	particles.

The	power	of	mind	over	body	has	been	demonstrated	by	clinical	research.
For	instance,	in	one	study,	a	group	of	women	were	told	that	they	would	be	given
a	hormone	injection	to	bring	on	their	menstrual	periods	two	weeks	early.
Actually,	they	were	merely	given	a	placebo	injection	of	saline.	Nonetheless,	over
70%	of	the	women	developed	early	pre-menstrual	tension	with	all	of	the
physical	and	psychological	symptoms.

Another	clear	demonstration	of	this	law	of	consciousness	is	observed	in
persons	with	multiple	personality	disorder.	Once	thought	to	be	rare,	it	is	now
found	that	multiple	personality	disorder	is	relatively	common;	and	so,	research
into	the	phenomenon	has	become	increasingly	prominent.	It	has	been	shown	that
the	different	personalities	in	the	one	body	have	different	physical
accompaniments.	There	are,	for	instance,	changes	in	the	electroencephalographic
brain	waves,	as	well	as	changes	in	their	handedness	in	handwriting,	pain
thresholds,	electrical	skin	response,	I.Q.,	menstrual	periods,	cerebral	hemisphere
dominance,	language	ability,	accent,	and	vision.	Thus,	when	the	personality	that
believes	in	allergies	is	present,	the	person	is	allergic;	but	when	another
personality	is	present	in	the	body,	the	allergies	disappear.	One	personality	may

require	glasses	and	another	may	not.	These	different	personalities	actually	have
notable	differences	in	intraocular	pressure	and	other	physiological
measurements.

These	physical	phenomena	also	shift	under	the	influence	of	hypnosis	in

normal	people.	Allergies	can	be	made	to	appear	or	disappear	by	simple
suggestion.	Persons	who	receive	the	suggestion	of	being	allergic	to	roses	while
under	hypnosis	will	start	sneezing	when	they	come	out	of	the	hypnotic	state	and
spot	a	vase	of	roses	on	the	doctor’s	desk,	even	if	the	roses	are	artificial.

Sir	John	Eccles,	Nobel	Laureate,	stated	that	after	a	lifetime	of	study	it
became	apparent	that	the	brain	is	not	the	origin	of	the	mind,	as	science	and
medicine	had	believed,	but	the	other	way	around.	The	mind	controls	the	brain,
which	acts	as	a	receiving	station	(like	a	radio)	with	thoughts	being	similar	to
radio	waves	and	the	brain	being	similar	to	the	receiver.

The	brain	is	like	a	receiving	set,	a	switchboard	that	receives	thought	forms

and	then	translates	them	into	neuronal	functioning	and	memory	storage.	For
instance,	until	recently	it	was	believed	that	voluntary	movements	of	the	muscles
originated	in	the	brain’s	motor	cortex.	But	now,	as	Eccles	has	reported,	the
intention	to	move	is	recorded	by	the	supplemental	motor	area	of	the	brain	next	to
the	motor	cortex.	The	brain	is,	therefore,	activated	by	the	mind’s	intention	and
not	vice	versa.

We	see	this	in	the	many	brain-imaging	studies	done	on	people	in	states	of
meditation.	For	example,	Dr.	Richard	Davidson’s	research	during	the	last	decade
at	the	University	of	Wisconsin	(Madison)	has	demonstrated	that	compassion	and
loving-kindness	meditation	practices	stimulated	increased	activity	in	the	left
prefrontal	cortex	(the	seat	of	positive	emotions	such	as	happiness)	and	the
production	of	high	amplitude	gamma	wave	synchrony	(sign	of	expanded
awareness,	alertness,	and	insight).	What	is	held	in	mind	has	the	power	to	alter
brain	activity	and	neuroanatomy.

We	are	subject	to	all	kinds	of	effects	of	the	unconscious	and	conscious
beliefs	that	our	mind	is	holding	on	all	of	our	bodily	systems.	This	includes	our
beliefs	about	the	supposed	effects	of	various	foods,	allergens,	menopausal	and
menstrual	disorders,	infections	and	all	other	diseases	that	are	associated	with
specific	belief	systems,	coupled	with	the	underlying	stress	proneness	due	to	the
presence	of	suppressed	negative	feelings.

Norman	Cousins,	editor-in-chief	of	the	Saturday	Review	for	three	decades,
demonstrated	this	principle	when	he	cured	himself	of	serious	physical	illness	by
means	of	laughter.	He	wrote	Anatomy	of	an	Illness,	a	book	about	his	experience
of	recovery	from	a	crippling	arthritic	disease	through	heavy	doses	of	Vitamin	C
and	belly-laughter	induced	by	films	featuring	the	Marx	brothers.	He	discovered

that	laughter	had	an	anesthetic	effect	that	could	alleviate	his	pain	for	two	hours.
Laughing	is	a	method	of	letting	go.	Through	laughter,	Cousins	just	kept	letting
go	of	the	underlying	emotional	pressure	and	cancelling	negative	thoughts.	This
resulted	in	very	positive	and	beneficial	changes	within	his	body	and	facilitated
his	eventual	recovery.

Disease-Prone	Beliefs
To	ascertain	our	own	disease	proneness,	we	can	look	at	the	following	questions:

Do	I	worry	about	my	health,	holding	fear	thoughts	in	mind	about	what	might
happen	to	me?

Do	I	get	a	secret	feeling	of	fear,	excitement,	and	danger	when	I	hear	about	a	new
disease	that	is	currently	being	reported	and	in	vogue?

Do	I	spend	time	on	constant	checkups,	reading	about	diseases,	getting	frightened
by	TV	stories	about	them?

Am	I	interested	in	hearing	about	the	diseases	of	famous	people?

Do	I	believe	that	the	environment	and	foods	are	full	of	hidden	dangers,	or	that
foods	contain	additives	which	are	poisonous	and	will	cause	disease?

Do	I	believe	that	certain	diseases	“run	in	our	family”?

Do	I	stop	or	want	to	stop	(but	don’t	dare)	to	witness	auto	accident	victims?

Do	I	like	hospital	TV	programs?

Do	I	like	TV	programs	that	include	hitting,	shouting,	fist	fights,	killing,	torture,
crime,	and	other	forms	of	violence?

Am	I	a	guilt-ridden	person?

Am	I	holding	a	lot	of	anger?

Do	I	condemn	other	peoples’	behavior?	Am	I	prone	to	be	judgmental?

Do	I	hold	resentments	and	grudges?

Do	I	feel	trapped	and	hopeless?

Do	I	say	of	myself,	“Whatever	is	going	around,	I’ll	probably	catch	it”?

Am	I	concerned	with	acquisitions	and	status	symbols	instead	of	the	quality	of
relationships?

Do	I	carry	a	lot	of	insurance	and	still	worry	that	it’s	not	enough?

In	summary,	the	way	to	change	our	bodies	is	to	change	our	thoughts	and
feelings.	We	must	let	go	of	negative	thoughts	and	belief	systems	and	shed	the
stress	of	negative	emotions	that	give	them	energy.	We	have	to	cancel	the
negative	programming	that	comes	from	the	world,	as	well	as	our	own	belief
systems.

We	can	see	the	deleterious	effects	of	fearful	negative	programming	in
people	who	become	subject	to	fear	of	foods,	chemicals,	and	substances	in	the
environment.	Each	day	a	new	chemical	or	substance	is	announced	to	have
harmful	effects.	The	more	fearful	we	are,	the	more	quickly	we	become
programmed,	and	then	the	body	responds	accordingly.	Fear	of	substances,	foods,
air,	energies,	and	stimuli	of	all	kinds	has	gotten	to	the	point	where	there	is
almost	an	environmental	paranoia.	Some	people	become	so	phobic	about	the
environment	and	everything	in	it	that	their	world	gets	smaller	and	smaller.	They
become	more	fearful	every	day.	Some	people	even	succumb	to	the	point	where
they	flee	the	world	and	live	in	artificial	bubble	enclosures,	victims	of	their	own
minds.

This	can	happen	to	a	reasonable	person,	even	to	a	physician.	It	started	with
pollens,	ragweed,	horse	dander,	dog	and	cat	hair,	dust,	feathers,	wool,	chocolate,
cheese,	and	nuts	(all	believed	to	cause	allergies).	Later,	sugar	was	added
(hyperglycemia)	plus	food	additives	(cancer),	eggs	and	dairy	products
(cholesterol),	and	organ	meats	(gout).	Next	on	the	“harmful”	list	came	food
dyes,	saccharine,	caffeine,	coloring	matter,	aluminum,	synthetic	fabrics,	noise,
fluorescent	lights,	insect	sprays,	deodorants,	food	cooked	at	high	temperature,
minerals	in	the	water,	chlorine	in	the	water,	nicotine,	cigarette	smoke,
petrochemicals,	car	exhaust	fumes,	positive	ions,	low	level	electric	vibrations,
acidic	foods,	pesticides,	and	foods	with	seeds.

The	world	shrank	so	small	that	there	was	nothing	safe	to	eat.	Nothing	could

be	worn.	There	was	no	air	to	breathe.	The	body	had	all	the	allergies,	reactions,
and	diseases	to	prove	it.	Going	out	to	dinner	became	an	enjoyment	of	the	past,
since	there	was	nothing	on	the	menu	that	could	be	eaten,	except	lettuce

(thoroughly	washed,	of	course),	and	it	was	imperative	to	wear	white	gloves
when	picking	up	restaurant	utensils!

Then,	with	the	learning	of	one	core	truth,	the	whole	pattern	unraveled.
“What	is	held	in	mind	tends	to	manifest”—including	unconscious	beliefs.	The
culprit	was	not	the	world	but	the	mind.	All	of	the	negative	programming	and
fearful	conditioning	was	in	the	mind,	and	the	body	obeyed	the	mind.	This	law	of
consciousness	reversed	the	spiraling	paranoia.	As	each	internal	belief	was
looked	at	and	surrendered,	all	of	the	negative	bodily	reactions,	diseases,	and
symptoms	disappeared.	In	other	words,	it	was	not	poison	ivy	leaves	that	caused
an	allergic	reaction	but	the	mind’s	belief	that	poison	ivy	was	an	allergen.	As	the
mind	let	go	of	its	programming,	the	body’s	reactions	cleared.

On	kinesiologic	testing,	there	was	a	complete	reversal	of	the	reaction
patterns.	What	had	formerly	produced	a	weak	muscle	response	no	longer	had
any	effect.	The	overall	stress	proneness	level	obviously	became	much	lower,	to
the	point	that	the	body	failed	to	react	at	all	to	what	would,	otherwise,	be
considered	negative	stimuli	(e.g.,	fluorescent	lights,	artificial	sweetener).

Comparison	with	Other	Techniques
As	we	have	seen,	stress	arises	from	within	as	a	response	to	a	stimulus.	The
stressor	actually	is	the	pressure	of	the	suppressed	and	repressed	emotional
energies,	which	are	a	reflection	of	our	general	low-level	consciousness.	Thus,	it
is	the	content	of	our	consciousness	that	has	to	be	changed	to	eliminate	and
prevent	stress.	The	commonly	prescribed	treatments	for	stress	are	similar	to	the
treatments	in	the	field	of	medicine.	They	try	to	fix	the	damage	done	by	the
disease	we	already	have,	rather	than	cure	the	internal	cause	of	the	disease.

Conferences	on	stress,	for	example,	routinely	include	the	following	topics:

Aromatherapy.

Physical	exercise	workshop.

Acupuncture	for	stress	disorders.

Bio-feedback.

Chiropractic.

Stress	regulation.

Nutrition.

Fitness	and	exercise	profile.

Homeopathy.

Autogenic	training.

Holistic	healing.

Massage	and	body	work.

Flotation	tanks.

Dental	balance.

Unwinding	technique	by	use	of	body	movements.

As	we	can	see	from	the	above,	the	common	approaches	deal	only	with	the
consequences	and	resultant	damage	from	the	stress	syndrome.	None	of	them	deal
with	the	basic	causes.	They	all	involve	relatively	complicated	and	time-
consuming	procedures,	and	they	do	not	lend	themselves	to	on-the-spot
application.

As	an	example,	let’s	say	that	we	are	giving	a	speech	or	lecture.	We	are	on

the	spot.	It	is	impractical	to	stop	in	the	middle	of	a	speech	and	do	breathing
exercises,	go	into	hypnotic	trance,	stick	ourselves	with	acupuncture	needles,	or
hitch	up	to	a	bio-feedback	machine.	How	handy	is	a	flotation	tank	in	the	middle
of	a	family	argument?

Because	these	approaches	are	temporary,	time-consuming,	and	often
expensive,	people	try	them	for	a	short	while	with	enthusiasm,	but	then	their
enthusiasm	wears	off	because	basically	nothing	has	really	changed.	The	same
basic	perceptions	of	the	world	persist.	The	same	emotional	pressures	are	there.
The	personality	remains	the	same.	Life	circumstances	have	not	changed.	One’s
level	of	consciousness	is	not	altered.	The	person’s	psychology	is	the	same.
Expectation	continues	as	before	and	life,	therefore,	continues	as	before.

Without	a	change	of	consciousness,	there	is	no	real	reduction	of	stress.
Only	the	consequences	are	ameliorated.	All	of	these	after-the-fact	techniques
and	treatments	do	help	and	often	alleviate	a	given	condition	and	bring	some
relief,	but	they	leave	the	basis	of	the	problem	untouched.	One	can	follow	all	of
these	techniques	and	yet	remain	the	same	stress-prone	person.	In	our	experience,

the	conscious	use	of	the	mechanism	of	surrender	is	more	effective	in	addressing
chronic	stress-related	illnesses.	Illnesses	begin	to	heal	spontaneously	because	the
underlying	emotional	cause	has	been	removed,	and	further	treatments	often
become	unnecessary.

In	the	uncommon	case	of	persistent	illness	that	is	not	cleared	by	the
surrender	of	negative	thoughts	and	feelings,	unknown	factors	such	as	karmic
proclivities	may	be	operating.	In	such	cases,	we	surrender	the	desire	to	change	or
control	our	experience	of	life,	and	we	await	further	inner	discovery	about	the
source	and	significance	of	the	illness.	Surrender	at	great	depth	is	complete	when
a	person	has	let	go	of	needing	or	wanting	a	physical	healing	to	occur.	A	state	of
peace	about	the	situation	is	reached	when	all	three	aspects	of	illness—physical,
mental,	and	spiritual—have	been	addressed	and	the	final	outcome	or	wished-for
recovery	has	been	surrendered.	Peace	comes	with	total	inner	surrender	to	what
is.

CHAPTER

16

THE	BENEFITS	OF	LETTING	GO

Emotional	Growth
The	most	obvious	and	visible	effect	of	letting	go	of	negative	feelings	is	a
resumption	of	emotional	and	psychological	growth	and	the	solving	of	problems,
which	often	have	been	long-standing.	There	is	pleasure	and	satisfaction	as	we
begin	to	experience	the	powerful	effects	of	eliminating	the	blocks	to
achievement	and	satisfaction	in	life.	We	soon	discover	that	the	limiting	thoughts
and	negative	beliefs,	which	we	had	naively	held	to	be	true,	were	all	merely	the
result	of	accumulated	negative	feelings.	When	the	feeling	is	let	go,	then,	the
thought	pattern	changes	from	“I	can’t”	to	“I	can”	and	to	“I’m	happy	to	do	it.”
Entire	areas	of	life	can	open	up.	What	used	to	be	awkward	or	unexpressed	can
become	effortless	and	joyously	alive.

Illustrative	of	this	progression	is	the	experience	of	an	intelligent,	successful,

middle-aged,	professional	man	who	all	his	life	had	been	unable	to	dance.	He
wanted	to	dance	in	the	worst	way,	and	several	times	during	his	life	had	attended
dancing	classes.	But	each	time,	he	found	himself	to	be	stiff,	awkward,	and	self-
conscious.	By	sheer	willpower,	he	did	manage	at	times	to	go	through	the
motions	on	the	dance	floor,	but	never	enjoyed	it	and	always	felt	ill	at	ease.	His
movements	felt	stiff	and	calculated,	and	the	whole	experience	was	lacking	in
satisfaction,	doing	nothing	for	his	self-esteem.

After	about	a	year	of	working	with	the	mechanism	of	surrender,	he	was	at	a

party	with	someone	who	kept	insisting	that	he	get	up	and	dance.	“You	know	I
can’t	dance,”	he	said.	“Ah,	come	on	and	try	it,”	she	entreated.	She	persisted	and
said,	“Forget	about	your	feet.	Just	watch	me	and	do	what	my	body	does.”

	
Reluctantly,	he	agreed,	and	he	kept	letting	go	of	his	feelings	of	resistance	and
anxiety.

On	the	dance	floor	he	let	go	completely.	In	an	instant,	his	inner	feelings
ascended	the	scale	from	apathy	to	love	and,	to	his	amazement,	he	suddenly
began	to	dance	like	he	had	always	dreamed	of	and	envied!	The	realization	of	“I
can	do	it!”	hit	him,	and	he	went	from	love,	to	joy,	and	even	to	ecstasy.	His
delight	radiated	to	everyone.	Friends	stopped	to	watch.	From	a	state	of	high	joy,
he	suddenly	went	into	the	experience	of	oneness	with	his	dance	partner.	He
suddenly	saw	his	own	Self	looking	out	of	her	eyes	and	realized	that	there	was
actually	only	one	Self	behind	all	the	individual	selves.	He	and	she	became
telepathically	connected.	He	knew	her	every	step	a	split	second	before	she	took
it.	They	were	in	perfect	harmony	and	danced	as	though	they	had	practiced	and
danced	together	for	years.	He	could	hardly	contain	his	joy.	The	dancing	became
effortless	and	began	to	happen	of	its	own,	without	any	conscious	thought	on	his
part.	The	longer	they	danced,	the	more	energy	he	felt.

It	was	a	peak	experience	that	was	to	change	this	man’s	life.	He	went	home
that	night	and	danced	some	more.	Free-style	disco	dancing	had	always	terrified
him	more	than	any	other	because	there	was	no	form	to	be	memorized.	It
necessitated	spontaneity	and	a	free	feeling,	which	is	just	what	he	had	specifically
been	unable	to	experience	previously.	At	home	he	turned	on	the	disco	music	and
began	to	dance	for	hours.	He	watched	himself	in	the	mirror,	fascinated	by	the
body’s	surrender	and	the	inner	feeling	of	freedom.

All	of	a	sudden,	he	remembered	a	previous	lifetime	in	vivid	detail.	He	had
been	a	great	dancer	in	that	lifetime,	and	now	he	began	to	remember	the	specific
instructions	that	had	been	given	to	him	by	his	teachers	in	that	lifetime.	When	he
followed	their	instructions,	the	results	were	amazing!	He	discovered	that	there
was	a	vertical	gravitational	center	of	balance	within	himself,	and	he	began	to
rotate	about	it	in	perfect	balance.	The	movement	was	effortless,	and	he	became
merely	the	witness	of	the	dancing.	It	was	no	longer	any	feeling	of	“I.”	There	was
just	the	joy	and	the	dancing	itself.	Now	he	instantly	understood	the	very	basis	of
the	Sufi	dancing	of	the	whirling	dervishes.	Their	ability	to	whirl	and	spin
without	dizziness	or	fatigue—that	certain	state	of	consciousness—ensued	from
the	surrendering	of	the	individual	self.

The	breakthrough	that	this	man	experienced	on	the	dance	floor	then

transferred	itself	to	many	other	previously	blocked	areas	of	his	life.	Where	there
had	been	limitation,	now	there	was	rapid	expansion.	These	changes	were	very
obvious	to	his	friends	and	family,	whose	positive	feedback	increased	his	self-
esteem	and	his	desire	to	keep	letting	go	of	the	negative	feelings	and	thoughts	that
had	blocked	the	experience	of	joy	in	life.

This	experience	has	been	cited	in	some	detail	for	a	number	of	reasons.	It
illustrates	the	scale	of	consciousness	that	we	presented	in	a	previous	chapter.	For
fifty	years,	this	man	had	been	at	the	lowest	end	of	the	scale	in	this	area	of	his
life,	with	the	accompanying	belief,	“I	can’t.”	The	inhibition	decreased	his	self-
esteem	and	resulted	in	avoidance.	For	years,	he	managed	to	avoid	social	affairs
where	there	would	be	dancing.	He	was	angry	at	himself	for	his	inhibition,	and	he
would	feel	angry	when	anyone	tried	to	get	him	to	dance.	In	a	matter	of	seconds
and	minutes,	he	experienced	every	emotion	of	the	whole	scale	and	went	all	the
way	to	the	top.	At	that	point,	there	was	the	emergence	of	a	higher	consciousness
with	sudden	spiritual	awareness	of	a	very	high	order.	With	higher	consciousness
came	understanding	and	the	release	of	psychic	ability	(telepathic
communication,	synchronicity,	and	past	life	recall).	As	a	result,	his	life	showed	a
behavioral	change,	and	its	momentum	removed	an	endless	series	of	blocks	and
limitations.	There	was	a	positive	social	response,	and	the	positive	feedback
reinforced	the	growth	motivation	that	was	already	in	progress.

The	rate	of	emotional	growth	reported	by	those	who	use	the	mechanism	of
surrender	is	related	to	the	consistency	with	which	they	surrender	their	negative
feelings,	and	there	is	no	relationship	to	age.	People	have	ranged	in	age	from	the
teens	to	the	eighties	with	equal	benefit.

Repressed	and	suppressed	feelings	require	counter-energy	to	keep	them
submerged.	It	takes	energy	to	hold	down	our	feelings.	As	these	feelings	are
relinquished,	the	energy	that	had	been	holding	down	the	negativity	is	now	freed
for	constructive	uses.	Consequent	to	letting	go,	there	is	an	increase	in	available
energy	for	creativity,	growth,	work,	and	interpersonal	relationships.	The	quality
and	enjoyment	of	these	activities	increase.	Most	people	are	too	exhausted	to
bring	a	really	high	quality	into	their	experiences	unless	the	negative	programs
opposing	them	have	been	resolved.

Problem	Solving
The	effectiveness	of	the	letting	go	mechanism	in	problem	solving	often	is	quite
astonishing.	Understanding	the	process	involved	here	is	very	important,	because
it	is	quite	different	than	the	world’s	usual	methods.	The	approach	that	brings	fast
and	easy	results	is	the	following:	Don’t	look	for	answers;	instead,	let	go	of	the
feelings	behind	the	question.	When	we	are	surrendered	on	the	feeling	behind
the	question,	we	can	let	go	of	any	other	feelings	that	we	might	also	have	about
what	seems	to	be	the	problem.	When	we	are	finally	and	fully	surrendered	on	all
components,	the	answer	will	be	there	waiting	for	us.	We	won’t	have	to	look	for
it.	Consider	how	simple	and	easy	this	is	as	compared	to	the	mind’s	usual	long,
drawn-out,	inefficient	attempts	at	problem	solving.	Usually	the	mind	hunts	and

pecks	endlessly,	fumbling	around	with	first	this	possible	answer	and	then	that
one.	The	reason	the	mind	can’t	decide	is	because	it	is	looking	in	the	wrong
place.

Let’s	see	how	the	system	works	with	a	common	everyday	example.	Let’s

say	that	we	disagree	with	our	mate	on	which	movie	to	see.	We	look	to	see	what
the	feeling	is	behind	the	problem.	In	this	case,	let’s	say	that	we	find	the	feeling
of	anger	and	resentment,	specifically	that	we	feel	resentful	about	the	lack	of
romantic	time	spent	together.	What	we	really	want	tonight	is	affectionate	time
spent	together.	As	we	let	it	be	okay	inside	ourselves	that	what	we	really	want	is
affectionate	togetherness,	it	suddenly	dawns	on	us	that	we	don’t	want	to	go	to	a
movie	at	all.	We	just	want	to	be	together.	Or	the	opposite	might	happen.	We
might	find	that	the	feeling	behind	wanting	to	go	to	a	movie	is	fear,	because	we
want	to	avoid	spending	the	evening	talking	to	and	being	close	to	our	mate.	We
see	that	the	feelings	we	have	built	up	are	unpleasant.	We	have	resentment,	so	we
let	go	of	wanting	to	modify	that	feeling,	and	we	just	let	it	be	there.	It’s	okay	to
have	that	resentment.	As	we	surrender	our	resistance	to	the	resentful	feeling,	we
feel	less	guilty;	we	admit	to	our	mate	that	we	have	had	a	resentment.	A	dialogue
starts	going,	and	the	other	person’s	feelings	are	cleared	up	as	well.	We	both	feel
relieved	and	closer,	and	we	then	say,	“To	heck	with	the	movies.	Let’s	stay	home,
make	love,	and	go	for	a	walk	in	the	moonlight.”

This	approach	is	rewarding	in	all	decision-making.	When	we	first	clear	out
the	underlying	feelings,	the	decisions	are	more	realistic	and	wise.	Think	of	how
often	we	have	changed	our	mind	and	regretted	past	decisions.	That	is	because
there	was	an	unrecognized	and	un-relinquished	feeling	behind	the	decision.
When	the	action	that	was	decided	upon	is	taken,	the	underlying	feeling	shifts.
Then,	from	the	viewpoint	of	the	new	feeling	space,	the	decision	turns	out	to	be
wrong.	This	happens	with	such	regularity	that	most	people	develop	a	fear	of
decision-making,	because	it	turned	out	to	be	wrong	so	often	in	the	past.

Problem	solving	using	the	mechanism	of	surrender	can	often	be	lightning
quick	with	problems	of	long	standing.	To	discover	how	fast	it	can	work,	let’s	try
it	out.	Take	several	problems	of	long	standing	and	stop	looking	for	the	answers.
Look	to	see	what	the	underlying	feeling	is	that	produced	the	question	in	the	first
place.	Once	that	feeling	is	let	go,	the	answer	will	present	itself	automatically.

Lifestyle
A	lot	of	our	activities	and	attachments	are	based	on	fear	and	anger,	guilt	and
pride.	As	these	negative	feelings	are	relinquished	in	any	given	area,	we	move	up
to	courage.	On	that	level,	changes	in	life	begin	to	occur.	Or,	if	we	choose	to
continue	the	same	activity,	the	motivation	is	different	and,	consequently,	we	will

experience	different	results	than	in	the	past.	The	emotional	payoff	will	at	least	be
different.	Instead	of	grim	satisfaction,	we	may	experience	joy.	We	may	find
ourselves	doing	the	same	activity	as	before,	but	now	we	do	it	out	of	enjoyment
rather	than	obligation.	We	do	it	because	we	want	to,	not	because	we	have	to.	The
energy	requirement	will	certainly	be	much	less.

One	delightful	discovery	we	will	make	is	that	our	capacity	for	love	is	far
beyond	what	we	ever	dreamed.	The	more	we	let	go,	the	more	loving	we	become.
More	and	more	of	our	life	will	be	spent	doing	things	that	we	love	to	do,	with
people	for	whom	we	feel	increasing	love.	As	this	happens,	our	life	becomes
transformed.	We	look	different.	People	respond	differently	to	us.	We	are
relaxed,	happy,	and	easy-going.	People	are	attracted	to	us	because	they	feel
comfortable	and	happy	around	us.	Waitresses	and	cab	drivers	suddenly
mysteriously	become	attentive	and	courteous,	and	we	will	wonder,	“What	has
come	over	this	world?”	The	answer	to	that	question	is	“You	have!”

As	we	let	go	the	negative,	we	come	into	our	own	power.	It	happens	of	its
own.	Happiness	was	in	there	all	along	and	now	it	shines	forth	after	the	blocks	to
it	have	been	surrendered.	We	are	now	influencing	everyone	with	whom	we	come
into	contact	in	a	favorable	way.	Love	is	the	most	powerful	of	the	emotional
energy	vibrations.	For	love,	people	will	go	to	any	lengths	and	do	things	that	they
would	never	do	for	any	amount	of	money.

When	the	negative	blocks	and	“I	can’ts”	are	removed,	whole	new	areas	of
life	open	up	to	us.	Success	stems	from	doing	what	we	like	to	do	best,	but	most
people	are	tied	down	to	what	they	imagine	they	have	to	do.	As	limitations	are
relinquished,	whole	new	avenues	of	creativity	and	expression	become	available.
Let’s	take	the	example	of	a	young	woman	with	a	lot	of	natural	musical
talent	who	was	spending	most	of	her	time	at	a	boring	job,	which	she	felt	she	had
to	stick	to	for	financial	reasons.	What	she	really	liked	to	do	was	play	musical
instruments	when	she	was	alone	at	home.	It	was	something	that	she	did	strictly
for	personal	enjoyment.	Because	of	the	lack	of	self-confidence,	she	seldom
played	for	other	people,	even	close	friends.	After	she	began	to	let	go	of	her	inner
limitations—all	of	the	low-energy	feelings	that	were	blocking	her	expression—
her	abilities	and	confidence	grew	so	rapidly	that	she	began	to	play	in	front	of
public	gatherings.	Her	talent	was	well	received,	and	a	busy	musical	career
ensued.	She	made	a	professional	recording	that	was	sufficiently	successful	that
she	could	cut	back	to	working	part	time,	and	she	began	to	pour	more	time	and
energy	into	what	was	now	a	blossoming	career	that	brought	her	great	joy	and
satisfaction.	Although	she	had	known	nothing	about	business,	she	now	started
her	own	musical	business	and,	within	a	year,	was	distributing	the	recordings
nationally,	then	in	Europe.	To	her	delight,	she	found	that	she	was	very	successful

by	doing	what	she	liked	to	do	best.	Her	increasing	vitality	and	happiness	were
apparent	to	everyone,	and	success	spread	to	other	areas	of	her	life.

Another	example	is	that	of	a	middle-aged	engineer	with	no	creative	ability
who	had	always	hated	poetry.	After	learning	to	let	go	of	his	negative	feelings,
suddenly	he	found	himself	writing	Haiku	(a	formal	Japanese	poetry	style).	He
began	writing	reams	of	it	effortlessly	and	later	developed	the	capacity	for
automatic	writing.

Still	another	example	is	that	of	a	sixty-year-old	woman	who	decided	to

return	to	college	part	time,	even	though	she	already	had	a	full-time	job.
Eventually,	she	attained	her	bachelor’s	degree,	then	her	master’s	degree,	and
finally	a	Ph.D.,	becoming	an	important	executive	with	great	responsibilities.
There	are	literally	thousands	of	examples	that	could	be	cited	of	the	rapid

expansions	that	take	place	in	people’s	life	when	the	“I	can’ts”	are	surrendered.
Life	situations,	often	of	long	standing,	may	be	suddenly	resolved.

Paradoxically,	such	breakthroughs	and	expansions	may	be	upsetting	to
friends	and	family	members	because	of	the	shift	of	balance.	Things	that	we	had
done	out	of	constriction,	fear,	guilt,	or	a	sense	of	duty	may	be	suddenly	thrown
overboard.	New	levels	of	consciousness	change	perception	and	new	horizons
open	up.	Many	of	the	motives	that	drive	people	may	suddenly	become
meaningless.	Such	things	as	money,	fame,	esteem,	position,	prestige,	power,
ambition,	competitiveness,	and	the	need	for	security	diminish.	They	are	replaced
by	the	motivations	of	love,	cooperation,	fulfillment,	freedom,	creative
expression,	expansion	of	consciousness,	understanding,	and	spiritual	awareness.
There	tends	to	be	more	reliance	on	intuition	and	feelings	than	on	thinking,
reason,	and	logic.	People	who	are	very	“yang”	may	discover	their	“yin”	side,	and
vice	versa.	Rigid	patterns	give	way	to	flexibility.	Safety	and	security	become
less	important	than	discovery	and	exploration.	Personal	lives	pick	up
momentum,	and	movement	replaces	stuck-in-a-rut	life	patterns.

One	surprising	observation	about	the	mechanism	of	letting	go	is	that	major
changes	can	take	place	very	rapidly.	Lifetime	patterns	can	suddenly	disappear,
and	long-standing	inhibitions	can	be	let	go	of	in	a	matter	of	minutes,	hours,	or
days.	Rapid	changes	are	accompanied	by	an	increased	aliveness.	The	life	energy
set	free	by	the	letting	go	of	negativity	now	flows	into	positive	attitudes,
thoughts,	and	feelings,	with	a	progressive	increase	of	personal	power.	Thoughts
are	now	more	effective.	More	is	accomplished	with	less	effort.	Intention	is	made
powerful	by	the	removal	of	doubts,	fears,	and	inhibitions.	With	the	removal	of
negativity,	dynamic	forces	are	unloosed,	so	that	what	were	once	impossible
dreams	now	become	actualized	goals.

Resolution	of	Psychological	Problems:	Comparison	with	Psychotherapy
In	general,	letting	go	is	often	more	rapid	than	psychotherapy.	It	is	often	more
liberating	and	stimulating	to	the	growth	of	consciousness	and	awareness.
Psychotherapy,	however,	is	better	designed	to	elucidate	underlying	patterns.	The
two	may	work	well	together.	The	mechanism	of	letting	go	facilitates	and	speeds
up	psychotherapy,	and	it	elevates	its	goals.	Psychotherapy	may	be	more
gratifying	intellectually	because	of	its	verbal	nature	and	its	focus	on	the	“whys”
behind	behavior.	However,	that	is	also	its	limitation.	Too	often	intellectual
insight	is	all	that’s	really	achieved,	and	the	emotional	working	through	is	slow,
often	painful,	and	ultimately	avoided.	The	mechanism	of	letting	go,	on	the	other
hand,	is	concerned	with	the	emotional	“what”	from	moment	to	moment,	without
involving	the	intellect.	The	“why”	becomes	apparent	of	itself	once	the	“what”
has	been	relinquished.	It’s	one	thing	to	analyze	the	causal	basis	of	depression
and	quite	another	to	enter	fully	into	the	depth	of	hopelessness	by	letting	go	of
your	resistance	to	the	feeling.	By	allowing	the	full	feeling	of	it	and	by	letting	go
of	every	sensation,	every	thought,	and	every	little	payoff	you	are	getting	from	it,
you	are	free.	It’s	not	necessary	to	probe	the	“why”	of	depression	to	become	free
from	the	“what”	of	it.

The	goals	of	letting	go	are	far	beyond	those	of	psychotherapy.	The	ultimate

aim	of	letting	go	and	surrendering	is	total	freedom.	The	goal	of	therapy	is
readjustment	of	the	ego	to	a	more	healthy	balance.	The	two	systems	are	based	on
different	paradigms	of	reality.	The	objective	of	psychotherapy	is	to	replace
unsatisfactory	mental	programs	with	more	satisfactory	ones.	In	contrast,	the
objective	of	letting	go	is	the	elimination	of	limiting	mental	and	emotional
programs.	It	is	the	attainment	of	an	unconditioned	mind	and,	ultimately,
transcendence	of	the	mind	itself	to	higher	states	of	consciousness	of	love	and
peace.

In	therapy,	there	is	dependence	on	therapists	and	their	training	and
techniques,	and	there	is	also	reliance	on	a	psychological	theory	to	which	the
therapist	and	the	patient	both	subscribe.	Scientific	research	reveals	that	the
results	of	therapy	are	not	related	to	the	therapist’s	school	of	psychotherapy,
training	or	technique;	instead,	the	results	are	related	to	the	interaction	between
them	and	the	degree	of	the	patient’s	desire	to	improve,	as	well	as	the	patient’s
faith	and	confidence	in	the	therapist.	Therefore,	psychic	factors	are	operating	of
which	psychotherapy	is	unaware.

With	the	mechanism	of	letting	go,	there	is	no	patient	role	and	no
dependency	on	another	person	or	theory.	The	very	wellsprings	of	neurotic
patterns	automatically	unfold	as	they	are	acknowledged,	relinquished,	and

disappear.	Their	basis	is	often	at	depths	untouched	by	psychotherapy.	Except	for
the	few	holistic	frameworks	(e.g.,	Jungian	analysis,	transpersonal	psychology),
therapy	can	be	based	on	a	limited	understanding	of	the	total	mind.	It	commonly
addresses	itself	only	to	a	portion	of	the	ego.	It	ignores	and	does	not	comprehend
the	great	forces	that	determine,	drive,	and	control	the	mind.	Since	the	purpose	of
most	psychotherapy	is	a	well-adjusted	ego,	there	is	no	conception	of	what	is
beyond	the	ego.

The	purpose	of	letting	go,	in	contrast,	is	the	elimination	of	the	ego.	The	ego
is	fearful	and	limited	and,	when	it	is	surrendered,	the	inner	Self	stands	forth,	and
what	was	always	more	powerful	is	revealed.	Many	psychotherapies	have	no	real
knowledge	of	the	Self	and	are,	therefore,	blind	to	Reality	Itself.	As	for	efficacy,
psychotherapy	is	like	a	horse	and	buggy,	while	the	mechanism	of	surrender	and
letting	go	is	like	a	space	ship.	In	the	time	it	takes	for	therapy	to	slowly	poke
about	a	limited	area,	letting	go	has	already	moved	far	beyond	it	into	a	whole	new
dimension.

Letting	go	has	a	peculiar	advantage	in	that	the	surrendering	of	one	negative

feeling	also	relinquishes	the	energy	behind	many	other	negative	feelings,	so
there	is	a	constant	across-the-board	effect.	For	instance,	a	successful	and	well-
educated	man	had	a	life-long	terrible	fear	of	heights,	an	intense	phobia.	At	the
time	that	he	learned	how	to	utilize	the	mechanism	of	surrender,	he	had	many
pressing	problems	in	his	life.	After	learning	how	to	surrender,	he	was	busy	with
letting	go	of	his	feelings	and	fears	about	major	life	problems	and	never	got
around	to	specifically	working	on	his	lifelong	fear	of	heights.	When	he	was	later
in	a	situation	involving	standing	on	a	roof,	he	was	amazed	to	discover	that	his
fear	had	greatly	lessened.	He	was	delighted	and	went	to	the	edge	of	the	roof
where	he	sat	dangling	his	feet.	He	was	now	able	to	get	up	on	ladders	and	go	on
the	roof	for	an	hour	with	no	discomfort.	This	illustrates	that,	as	one	fear	is
relinquished,	all	fear	is	diminished	non-specifically.

Psychotherapy	aims	at	the	amelioration	of	neurotic	patterns.	Letting	go,
however,	is	designed	to	undo	the	underlying	causes	of	all	neurotic	formation.	It
undoes	the	basic	structure	of	maladaptive	feeling	and	behavior.	Psychotherapy
seeks	for	an	improvement	in	neurotic	balance.	Letting	go,	however,	eliminates	it
all	together.

A	limitation	of	most	psychotherapeutic	frameworks	is	that	the	therapist	is

constricted	to	what	the	world	calls	a	healthy,	functioning	ego	with	all	its
restrictions.	In	this	paradigm,	a	healthy	patient	is	considered	to	be	one	who
shares	the	same	illusions	and	limitations	condoned	by	society	and	the	therapist.
By	contrast,	the	purpose	of	the	mechanism	of	surrender	is	to	transcend	the
illusions	of	the	world	and	reach	the	ultimate	truth	behind	it—which	is	Self-

Realization—and	to	discover	the	very	basis	of	the	mind	itself,	the	source	of	all
thought	and	feeling.

The	goal	of	letting	go	is	the	elimination	of	the	very	source	of	all	suffering

and	pain.	This	sounds	radical	and	startling	and,	in	fact,	it	is!	Ultimately,	all
negative	feelings	stem	from	the	same	source.	When	enough	negative	feelings
have	been	relinquished,	that	source	reveals	itself.	When	that	source	itself	is	let
go	of	and	dis-identified	with,	the	ego	dissolves.	The	source	of	suffering,
therefore,	loses	the	very	basis	of	its	power.

Each	of	us	has	a	limit	to	the	amount	of	negative	feelings	we	have	stored	up.

When	the	pressure	behind	an	emotion	has	been	let	go,	that	emotion	no	longer
occurs.	For	instance,	if	fear	is	constantly	surrendered	for	a	period	of	time,
eventually	it	runs	out.	It	then	becomes	difficult	or	almost	impossible	to	feel
further	fear.	It	takes	progressively	more	and	more	of	a	stimulus	to	elicit	it.
Finally,	the	person	who	has	surrendered	a	great	deal	of	fear	actually	has	to
search	for	it	diligently.	The	energy	of	fear	simply	isn’t	there	anymore.	Anger
also	progressively	diminishes	so	that	even	a	major	provocation	fails	to	elicit	it.	A
person	with	little	fear	or	anger	feels	primarily	love	all	of	the	time	and
experiences	a	loving	acceptance	of	events,	people,	and	the	vicissitudes	of	life.

The	goal	of	surrender	is	transcendence.	Psychotherapy	accepts	levels	of
behavior	as	healthy	that,	from	the	viewpoint	of	total	freedom,	are	unacceptable.
For	instance,	in	psychotherapy,	minimal	fear,	anger,	and	pride	might	be
considered	necessary	or	acceptable	levels	of	functioning	and	perhaps	even
“healthy.”	But	as	we	have	seen,	the	innate	destructiveness	behind	those	lower
states	is	ultimately	not	acceptable—given	the	power	of	surrender	to	transcend
them	totally.	Beyond	the	“acceptable	level	of	functioning”	awaits	our	greater
destiny:	total	freedom.

CHAPTER

17

TRANSFORMATION

Although	letting	go	seems	simple	and	easy,	its	ultimate	effects	are	profoundly
powerful.	A	quick	little	surrender	done	in	an	almost	off-handed	manner	can
sometimes	bring	about	a	major	change	in	our	life.	We	can	picture	it	being
similar	to	the	wheel	of	a	ship.	If	we	make	even	a	one-degree	change	in	the	ship’s
compass,	we	will	notice	very	little	difference;	but,	as	the	ship	sails	over	the	sea
hour	after	hour,	day	after	day,	a	one-degree	change	in	the	compass	will	end	up
taking	us	to	a	very	different	place	many	miles	from	where	the	original	course
would	have	taken	us.

In	this	chapter	we	want	to	look	at	the	effect	that	the	mechanism	of	surrender
has	on	those	areas	of	life	with	which	most	people	are	concerned:	health,	wealth,
and	happiness.	We	will	discuss	these	areas	as	they	are	usually	experienced	by
the	majority	of	people,	and	make	a	contrast	to	the	changes	that	will	occur	as	the
practice	of	letting	go	progresses.	These	changes	are	quite	obvious	when	we
watch	the	lives	of	others	who	use	the	technique.	They	will	become	obvious	in
your	own	life	as	well.	Sometimes	you	will	not	be	aware	of	them;	therefore,	it	is
suggested	that	you	keep	a	list	of	goals	and	check	off	the	gains	as	they	occur,	so
that	you	remain	conscious	and	aware	of	the	progress.	This	self-awareness	step	is
to	circumvent	a	peculiarity	of	the	mind.	When	we	decide	on	a	specific	technique
to	improve	our	life,	and	when	improvement	occurs,	the	mind	has	a	peculiar
tendency	to	discount	the	very	technique	that	brought	about	the	change.	It	is	as
though	the	mind’s	ego	is	so	vain	that	it	doesn’t	want	to	give	credit	where	credit
is	due.

This	proclivity	of	mind	to	discount	inner	progress	is	sometimes	quite

	
comical.	For	instance,	a	man	who	had	been	stuck	in	the	same	job	position	for	23
years	began	using	the	technique	of	letting	go.	Within	a	couple	of	months,	he
suddenly	jumped	to	the	position	of	Vice	President	and,	by	the	end	of	the	year,	he
was	President	of	the	company.	When	asked	if	he	was	pleased	with	himself	about
what	he	had	accomplished	by	using	the	inner	technique,	his	mind	totally
discounted	it	and	ascribed	his	gains	to	“shifts	in	business	patterns.”	His	marriage
had	also	improved	and	the	mind,	again,	ascribed	the	improvements	to	external
reasons:	“My	wife’s	attitudes	finally	changed.”	The	relationship	with	his	son
also	improved,	and	the	mind	again	circumvented	the	inner	transformation	and
said	it	was	due	to	the	fact	that	his	son	was	“getting	older.”

In	the	discussions	that	follow,	it	will	be	noted	that	the	transitions	from	one
state	to	a	higher	state	are	not	difficult	to	make.	They	may	only	seem	“difficult”
to	us	because	of	current	perceptions.	It’s	important	to	keep	in	mind	that,	as	we
surrender,	our	perceptions	will	change.	Our	goals	will	automatically	be	elevated.
What	now	seems	impossible	will	become	old	hat	after	we	have	been	practicing
the	technique	a	while.

We	will	also	notice	that,	as	the	mind	contrasts	the	lower	level	of	life	with

the	higher	level,	a	peculiar	resistance	to	the	description	of	a	higher	level	of
functioning	will	occur	at	times.	The	mind	will	get	critical	and	try	to	save	face	by
ridiculing	a	higher	state.	This	is	a	golden	opportunity	because	this	is	the	very
attitude	that	prevents	a	person	from	reaching	that	higher	state	of	life.	The	very
process	of	reading	this	material	is	invaluable,	for	it	will	reveal	precisely	what	the
blocks	are	and	exactly	why	these	goals	are	impossible	at	the	present	time.	As
resistances,	criticisms,	and	disparagements	come	up,	we	can	begin	surrendering
them	and	letting	them	go	right	now	in	the	process	of	reading	about	them.	It	is	a
great	opportunity	to	identify	the	inner	blocks	to	fulfillment.	As	Pogo	said,	“We
have	identified	the	enemy,	and	it	is	us.”

As	a	professional	psychotherapist	and	psychiatrist	with	many	decades	of

clinical	experience	and	training,	these	higher	levels	of	functioning	were
considered	to	be	impossible	for	most	people.	However,	learning	how	the
mechanism	of	surrender	works	on	the	practical	level	and	watching	hundreds	of
families,	friends,	patients,	and	ex-patients	transform	their	lives	has	totally
changed	this	view.	Now,	higher	levels	of	functioning	are	seen	to	be	automatic,
easy	to	achieve,	and	available	to	everyone,	often	in	a	surprisingly	short	period	of
time.	As	a	matter	of	fact,	some	of	these	levels	of	success	and	happiness	will
seem	impossible,	but	the	higher	level	will	already	have	occurred	by	the	time	you
have	finished	reading	this	book.	You	can	tell	yourself	right	in	the	beginning	that
these	high	levels	of	functioning	are	not	only	possible,	but	they	are	an	inherent
birthright.	They	are	the	natural	state	of	which	you	have	been	deprived	by	all	the

programming	that	the	mind	has	been	subjected	to	since	birth.

Before	reading	on,	it	is	advisable	to	sit	quietly	and	make	an	inner	decision	to

let	go	resisting	higher	levels	of	functioning.	This	means	to	make	a	decision	to
stop	denying	the	higher	levels	to	yourself,	and	to	make	a	decision	to	let	go	of	all
blocks	to	happiness,	success,	health,	acceptance,	love,	and	peace.	By	doing	this,
the	deed	is	already	done,	for	you	have	set	the	whole	experience	into	a	context
that	will	automatically	begin	to	unfold.

Health
The	average	person	is	preoccupied	with	the	body,	its	functioning,	performance,
appearance,	and	survival.	The	average	mind	is	beleaguered	with	worries,	fears	of
sickness,	suffering,	disease,	and	death;	therefore,	the	mind	sets	about	defending
the	body	in	a	great	variety	of	ways.	This	leads	to	over-attention	to	diet,	weight,
exercise,	and	the	health	of	the	environment.	With	such	inner	tension,	by	the	end
of	the	day	the	average	person	frequently	feels	like	a	victim:	drained,	empty,	and
exhausted.

One	consequence	of	this	preoccupation	with	the	body	is	self-consciousness.

Within	the	field	of	awareness,	the	body’s	presence	is	prominent,	and	there	is	a
mental	fixation	with	what	it	is	doing,	its	whereabouts	and	movements,	its
survival,	the	attitudes	and	approval	of	other	persons	toward	the	body,	its
appearance	and	behavior.

Underlying	all	of	this	concern	is	the	unconscious	equation,	“I	am	a	body.”

This	is	a	very	limited	level	of	consciousness.	In	fact,	in	the	spiritual	world	this	is
called	“being	unconscious.”	Because	it	is	a	false	identification	due	to	a	marked
narrowing	of	awareness,	it	is	like	wearing	blinders.	It	is	like	having	a	pimple	on
the	nose	and	thinking	that	the	whole	world	now	revolves	around	that	pimple,	and
going	through	the	day	with	that	pimple	most	prominent	in	our	mind.

Be	aware	of	how	much	energy	is	drained	by	this	constant	preoccupation
with	the	body.	Our	mind	has	been	continuously	programmed	with	a	countless
variety	of	belief	systems	about	the	body:	what	it	needs,	what	will	be	good	for	it,
and	its	infinite	number	of	vulnerabilities.	This	leads	to	constant	preoccupations
with	all	kinds	of	health	preventive	measures,	including	health	food	fads,	the
endless	reading	of	labels	for	potentially	poisonous	ingredients,	the	fear	of	being
near	someone	smoking	a	cigarette,	the	fear	of	dusts	and	pollens	and	all	of	the
supposed	contaminants	of	the	environment.	There	is	an	obsession	with	offsetting
all	of	these	“dangers”	by	various	countermeasures.

As	we	have	seen	from	previous	discussions,	these	vulnerabilities	are	merely

the	product	of	the	mind,	and	the	body	will	react	to	what	is	held	in	mind.	This
was	demonstrated	in	our	discussion	of	multiple	personalities	where	the	body

reflected	in	each	instant	what	that	particular	personality	and	mind	believed.

As	we	begin	letting	go	of	all	these	fears,	cancelling	the	belief	systems	and
reaffirming	that	our	true	Self	is	Infinite	and	not	subject	to	limitations,	we	move
into	a	higher	state	of	health,	wellness,	and	vital	energy.	A	helpful	way	to	phrase
it	to	ourselves	is,	“I	am	an	Infinite	Being,	not	subject	to	____________.”	We	put
into	the	blank	space	whatever	disease	or	substance	that	the	mind	has	been
programmed	to	see	as	a	possible	“danger”	for	us.

After	letting	go	of	the	endless	variety	of	bodily	fears,	concerns	and	belief
systems,	physical	illnesses	begin	to	resolve	automatically.	There	is	an	increase	in
the	feeling	of	aliveness	and	personal	freedom.	In	the	state	of	total	surrender,	the
body	is	barely	perceived	at	all.	It	is	only	peripherally	in	awareness,	and	there	is
no	preoccupation	with	it.	It	functions	effortlessly,	smoothly,	and	with	very	little
attention.

A	surrendered	person	can	eat	anything	or	go	anywhere	and	is	no	longer

subject	to	fears	of	contaminants,	pollutants,	drafts,	germs,	electromagnetic
frequencies,	carpet,	smoke,	dust,	animal	dander,	poison	ivy,	pollen,	or	food	dyes.
Our	perception	of	the	body	shifts,	and	it	now	seems	to	be	like	a	puppet	or	a	pet.
This	shift	of	perception	is	from	“I	am	the	body”	to	“I	have	a	body.”

It	becomes	progressively	obvious	that	the	body	is	not	experiencing	itself	at

all.	On	the	contrary,	it	is	the	mind	that	is	experiencing	the	body.	Without	the
mind,	the	body	cannot	be	perceived	at	all.	The	arm	cannot	experience	its	arm-
ness.	Only	the	mind	can	experience	the	arm-ness.	This,	of	course,	is	the	very
basis	of	anesthesia.	When	the	mind	is	asleep,	the	body	has	no	sensation.	It
slowly	dawns	on	us	that,	in	fact,	the	body	doesn’t	have	any	sensation;	only	the
mind	is	capable	of	that	function.

This	is	a	very	important	shift	of	consciousness	because	now	the

preoccupation	is	not	with	the	body	and	defending	it.	The	focus	of	attention	now
shifts	to	the	mind,	which	is	where	the	greater	power	lies.	As	we	shift	our
thoughts,	feelings	and	perceptions,	we	begin	to	notice	that	the	body	follows	suit.
We	recognize	that	people	are	not	really	responding	to	our	body	at	all	but	to	our
inner	attitudes,	our	energy	state,	and	our	level	of	awareness.	One	day	it	dawns	on
us	that	everyone	and	everything	in	the	world	are	responding	to	our	level	of
consciousness,	our	intention,	and	to	the	inner	feeling	we	have	about	them.	We
register	the	magnetism	of	saintly	people	such	as	Mother	Teresa,	the	Dalai	Lama,
and	Mahatma	Gandhi.	We	see	that	they	are	beloved	not	because	of	their	physical
appearance,	but	because	of	the	inner	radiance	of	love	and	peace	they	emanate.
The	shift	of	focus	from	the	physical	level	to	the	level	of	consciousness	begins	to
bring	rapid	results.

The	persistent	surrender	of	negative	feelings	and	attitudes	means	that	the

associated	guilt	is	also	being	constantly	relinquished.	A	consciousness	that	is	not
guilt-ridden	tends	no	longer	to	attract	disease.	In	the	unconscious,	guilt	requires
punishment	and	sickness,	with	its	attendant	pain	and	suffering,	as	the	mind’s
most	frequent	means	of	self-retaliation.	This	self-retaliation	may	take	the	form	of
an	accident,	cold,	attack	of	the	flu,	arthritis,	or	any	of	the	multiple	diseases	that
the	mind	has	invented.	These	diseases	take	epidemic	forms	due	to	television	and
media	publicity.	When	a	prominent	figure	shares	with	the	public	some	serious
illness,	there	is	a	sudden	jump	in	the	incidence	of	that	illness.	The	unconscious
grabs	hold	of	a	disease	and	utilizes	it	to	settle	the	score.	With	the	constant
surrender	of	inner	guilt,	there	is	less	and	less	of	a	score	to	be	settled.	Therefore,	a
person	who	is	free	of	negativity	and	guilt	tends	to	be	free	of	disease	and
suffering.

The	healing	can	be	dramatic.	There	was	the	case,	for	example,	of	a

magazine	publisher	who	was	in	a	hopeless	state	of	advanced	multiple	sclerosis.
The	medical	profession	had	done	what	it	could	and	had	given	her	up	as	a
terminal,	hopeless	case.	At	that	point,	she	came	upon	a	technique	of
relinquishing	guilt	by	studying	the	“Workbook”	of	A	Course	in	Miracles.	In
working	with	this	home-study	course,	which	consists	of	contemplating	exactly
one	short	lesson	a	day	for	365	days,	she	began	to	undo	all	of	her	guilt	and
resentment	through	the	mechanism	of	forgiveness.	By	constantly	forgiving	and
undoing	the	negative	feelings,	and	therefore	undoing	her	inner	guilt,	the	disease
of	multiple	sclerosis	reversed	itself.	As	of	this	writing,	she	has	been	recovered
for	years	and	is	in	radiant	glowing	health,	happy	with	her	life.

Health	and	well-being,	then,	are	generally	the	automatic	consequence	of	the

letting	go	of	guilt	and	other	negativities,	as	well	as	the	letting	go	of	our
resistance	to	the	positive	states	of	health	and	wellbeing.	Through	the	surrender
mechanism,	the	whole	gamut	of	illnesses	can	be	resolved	into	wellness.

As	was	said	earlier,	there	may	be	uncommon	cases	in	which	illness	or

infirmity	continues	unabated	due	to	unknown	factors,	such	as	karmic
proclivities.	Continual	surrender	brings	healing	at	the	level	of	inner	being	so
that,	even	while	the	body	appears	to	suffer	limitation	and	others	may	see	it	as
“tragic,”	the	person	is	at	peace	and	radiates	an	inner	well-being	that	uplifts
others.	Through	surrender	at	great	depth,	such	persons	have	let	go	of	self-pity,
guilt,	and	resistance	to	life	circumstances.	They	have	transcended	the	view	that
their	illness	is	a	barrier	to	personal	happiness	and	see	it	as	a	vehicle	of	blessing
to	others.	In	recent	years,	public	examples	of	this	phenomenon	have	included	the
late	Pope	John	Paul	II,	who	approached	his	unremitting	Parkinson’s	disease	as	a
spiritual	opportunity	to	become	one	with,	and	even	to	take	on,	the	suffering	of
others.

Wealth
This	is	an	important	subject,	not	only	because	it	has	such	a	direct	effect	on	our
life,	but	also	because	it	so	quickly	and	easily	makes	obvious	our	feelings,
thoughts,	and	attitudes	about	money.	To	the	mind	that	holds	limiting	belief
systems	and	negative	thoughts	and	feelings,	money	is	a	“problem.”	It	is	a	source
of	endless	worry	and	anxiety,	hopelessness	and	despair,	or	of	vanity,	pride,
arrogance,	intolerance	of	others,	jealousy,	and	envy.	At	its	worst	the	end	result
of	all	the	negativity	is	a	feeling	of	financial	limitation,	lack,	and	deprivation.	In
this	area,	the	feeling	“I	can’t”	due	to	fear	and	limitation	is	often	skirted	by
simply	avoiding	the	whole	issue	of	money	and	resigning	oneself	to	a	low	social
economic	status	as	“inevitable.”

The	unconscious	brings	to	us	what	it	thinks	we	deserve.	If	our	view	of

ourselves	is	small,	limited,	and	miserly—due	to	accumulated	guilt—then	the
unconscious	will	bring	those	economic	conditions	into	our	life.	Our	attitudes
about	money	can	be	discovered	when	we	look	at	the	many	things	that	it	means.
For	example,	we	see	the	degree	to	which	it	stands	for	security,	power,	glamour,
sexual	attraction,	successful	competition,	self-worth,	and	our	value	to	others	and
the	world.

It	is	very	useful	to	sit	down	with	pencil	and	paper	and,	under	the	heading
“Money,”	begin	to	delineate	what	its	real	meanings	are	in	all	the	various	avenues
of	life.	Then,	write	down	the	feelings	that	are	associated	with	each	area	and
begin	to	surrender	on	each	negative	feeling	and	attitude.	As	we	do	this,	we	have
the	surprising	discovery	that	money	in	and	of	itself	is	not	the	most	basic	issue.
More	important	than	money	itself	are	the	emotional	gratifications	that	we	hope
will	be	ours	with	the	use	of	that	money.

Let’s	say	that,	behind	the	desire	for	money,	we	discover	that	one	of	our
goals	is	to	be	respected	and	valued.	In	that	discovery,	we	have	just	found	out	that
it	isn’t	money	itself	that	we	are	interested	in;	rather,	it	is	our	self-respect	and	a
feeling	of	inner	worth.	We	see	that	money	was	just	a	tool	to	achieve	something
else	and	that,	as	a	matter	of	fact,	it	isn’t	money	that	we	want	at	all	but	the	self-
respect	and	esteem	we	thought	it	would	bring	us.	It	will	also	dawn	on	us	that	the
goals	which	we	thought	money	would	bring	us	can	be	achieved	directly.	The
higher	our	inner	self-esteem,	the	less	we	need	the	approval	of	others.	As	we
uncover	these	awarenesses,	money	takes	on	a	different	meaning	in	each	area	of
life.	Money	now	becomes	subservient	to	higher	goals	rather	than	an	end	unto
itself.

Without	being	conscious	of	what	money	means	to	us	emotionally,	we	are	at
the	effect	of	it.	We	are	being	run	by	our	unconscious	beliefs	about	money	and	all

of	its	associated	programs.	It	is	like	the	millionaire	who	keeps	piling	up	more
and	more	millions.	There	never	seems	to	be	enough.	Why	is	that?	It	is	because
he	has	never	stopped	to	look	at	what	money	really	means	to	him.	If	we
obsessively	chase	after	money	or	other	symbols	of	wealth,	it	is	because	our	inner
self-worth	is	so	small	that	it	takes	a	huge	amount	of	money	to	compensate	for	it.
The	inner	insecurity	is	so	extensive	that	no	amount	of	money	can	overcome	it.	It
might	be	said	that	the	smaller	we	feel	inside,	the	greater	amount	of	power,
money,	and	glamour	must	be	accumulated	in	order	to	try	and	compensate	for	the
inner	smallness.

When	we	are	in	a	surrendered	state,	we	are	free	from	that	inner	smallness,
insecurity,	and	low	self-esteem.	Then,	money	becomes	merely	a	tool	to	achieve
our	goals	in	the	world.	We	have	an	inner	security,	knowing	that	there	will
always	be	sufficient	abundance.	We	will	always	get	what	we	need	when	we	need
it,	because	we	have	an	inner	feeling	of	completion,	fulfillment,	and	satisfaction.
Money,	then,	becomes	a	source	of	pleasure	rather	than	a	source	of	anxiety.

On	a	certain	level,	we	may	even	appear	to	be	indifferent	to	money.	When

we	need	it	to	complete	a	project,	it	just	magically	seems	to	appear	from
somewhere.	We	feel	nonchalant	about	it	because	we	are	connected	to	the	source
of	our	own	power.	When	we	re-own	the	power	that	we	have	given	to	money	and
see	that	it	is	our	own	power,	we	are	no	longer	concerned	about	money,	nor	do
we	need	to	accumulate	a	great	deal	of	it.	Once	we	have	the	formula	for	gold,	we
don’t	need	to	carry	a	bag	of	it	on	our	shoulder	with	all	of	its	attendant	worries
and	anxieties.

The	problem	with	excessive	accumulation	of	money,	of	course,	is	the
constant	fear	of	losing	it.	It	is	tragi-comic	to	watch	someone	who	is	worth	50
million	dollars	practically	have	a	nervous	breakdown	because,	through	a
business	oversight,	he	lost	10	million	dollars.	The	man	was	actually	in	a	panic.
Emotionally,	he	was	frightened	that	he	would	not	be	able	to	survive	on	the
planet	with	only	40	million	dollars.	The	person	who	suffers	from	inner	poverty	is
relentlessly	driven	to	accumulate	on	the	material	level.	With	this	inner	poverty,
there	is	the	whole	attitude	of	selfishness	or	its	correlates	of	vanity	and	false
pride.

It	is	very	common	for	people	who	use	the	letting	go	technique	suddenly	to
come	into	abundance.	Struggling	actors	now	have	starring	roles	in	Hollywood.	A
playwright	on	the	edge	of	poverty	becomes	the	producer	of	a	smash	Broadway
hit.	Paradoxically,	some	people	have	grown	so	nonchalant	about	money	that	they
have	chosen	to	get	rid	of	a	lot	of	money	and	live	a	much	simpler	life.	They	are
no	longer	interested	in	money;	they	have	mastery	over	it.	The	inner	satisfactions
that	they	had	sought	by	means	of	money	are	now	satisfied	directly,	so	that	inner

happiness	is	independent	of	outer	wealth.	In	this	state	of	inner	freedom,	one	is
independent	of	the	outer	world	and	no	longer	at	the	effect	of	it.	This	is	because
one	transcends	that	which	one	has	mastered.

Happiness
In	the	sections	on	Health	and	Wealth,	we	have	already	touched	upon	important
areas	relating	to	overall	happiness.	Now	we	will	focus	more	on	inner	emotional
life	because	that	is	where	we	all	really	live.	The	purpose	of	health	and	wealth	is,
after	all,	merely	because	we	presume,	and	to	some	extent	it	is	true,	that	they
result	in	happiness.	Happiness	can	be	experienced	directly,	however,	and	on	this
level	it	is	relatively	independent	of	health	or	wealth.

Let’s	take	an	objective	look	at	the	average	view	of	happiness.	To	begin

with,	the	happiness	is	extremely	vulnerable.	A	chance	remark,	a	critical
comment,	a	raised	eyebrow,	or	a	car	cutting	into	line	ahead	of	us	are	all
sufficient	to	blow	the	average	person’s	happiness	in	an	instant.	The	threat	of	a
job	loss,	a	feeling	of	distrust	in	a	relationship,	a	foreboding	remark	by	a	doctor,
or	an	impertinent	cab	driver,	are	sufficient	to	ruin	the	day	for	many	of	us.	Why	is
our	happiness	so	fragile	that	commonplace	occurrences	can	“ruin”	the	whole
day?

In	the	section	on	the	anatomy	of	emotions,	we	have	already	looked	at	the
reasons	for	this.	As	a	result	of	negative	feelings,	thoughts,	and	attitudes,	together
with	the	constant	judgment	and	criticism	of	other	people,	we	often	feel	separated
from	others.	Because	of	this	feeling	of	inner	aloneness	and	separation,
relationships	take	on	the	form	of	attachments,	with	all	the	fear,	anger,	and
jealousy	that	accompany	any	threat	to	those	attachments.	The	inner	negativity
results	in	such	commonly	held	beliefs	as,	“You	are	born	alone	and	you	die
alone.”	Nothing,	in	fact,	is	farther	from	the	truth.	As	recent	books	on	near-death
experiences	reveal,	it	is	during	life	that	one	often	feels	alone	and,	at	the	moment
of	death,	there	is	an	absolute	feeling	of	oneness	and	connectedness	(Eadie,	1992;
Neal,	2011).

Because	of	attachments,	dependencies,	and	inner	smallness,	we	may	feel

weak	and	limited.	The	guilty	intolerance	of	our	inner	thoughts	and	feelings	are
projected	onto	the	world,	making	the	world	look	like	a	fearful	place.	Because
these	fears	are	held	in	mind,	fearful	events	and	experiences	are	literally	brought
into	our	life	experience.	Fear	results	in	chronic	anger	and	makes	us	prone	to
attack	and	to	inner	emotional	chaos.	Pain	and	suffering	occur,	with	periodic
despair	and	proneness	to	emotional	upset.	The	ego-mind,	which	sees	everyone	as
separate,	is	envious	of	anyone	else	who	appears	happier,	more	successful,	or
with	a	better	relationship,	a	better	body,	or	better	connections.	Soon,	because	of

a	lack	of	inner	clarity	about	goals,	there	is	confusion	leading	to	self-pity,	envy,
and	further	resentment.	Self-condemnation	gets	endlessly	projected	onto	the
world,	taking	the	form	of	condemnation	from	others,	which	increases	further	the
guilt	and	feeling	of	smallness.

For	some	of	us,	the	only	escape	is	through	grandiosity,	intolerance,	bigotry,
arrogance,	and	anger,	which	take	the	form	of	cruelty,	over-bearingness,	brutality,
and	insensitivity	to	the	feelings	of	others.	Often	the	insensitivity	comes	with
self-excuses,	such	as:	“I	am	an	upfront	person	who	speaks	my	mind,”	or	“I	am
the	frank	type;	you	always	know	where	you	stand	with	me.”	These	comments
are	a	cover-up	for	insensitivity,	which	might	be	better	described	as	gauche.	The
low	self-esteem	results	in	criticism	of	self	and	others,	constant	competition	and
comparison,	analyzing,	contempt,	intellectualization,	doubt,	and	fantasies	of
revenge.	When	all	of	those	mechanisms	fail,	there	is	the	recurrence	of	apathy
and	feelings	of	hopelessness	and	victimization.	In	such	a	state,	we	become
progressively	alienated	because	there	is	so	much	of	ourselves	that	we	must	hide.
Our	behavior	leads	to	isolation	from	others	and	an	imbalance	due	to	over-
valuation	of	the	areas	of	life	that	do	seem	to	work.

Because	of	this	inner	chaos,	the	average	person	must	of	necessity	stay
unconscious	at	all	times.	It	is	interesting	to	watch	the	means	that	the	mind	has
invented	to	accomplish	this	end.	We	watch	as	a	person	gets	up	in	the	morning
and	flips	on	the	radio	or	the	television	to	immediately	get	the	mind	off	the	self
and	its	mental	chatter.	Despite	the	extra	amusement,	thoughts	and	feelings	tend
to	arise	until	the	mind	becomes	preoccupied	with	the	projects	of	the	day,	work,
and	various	schemes	of	accomplishment	or	pleasure.	It	starts	the	preoccupation
with	the	body—all	of	the	brushing,	washing,	perfuming,	powdering,	deodorizing
and	carefully	selecting	the	clothes	for	the	day.	The	choosing	of	clothes	brings	up
all	the	schedules	of	the	day,	its	busyness	with	activities	that	have	all	been
crowded	into	the	day:	the	endless	appointments,	phone	calls,	errands,	social
engagements,	home	responsibilities,	and	emails.	On	the	way	to	work	or	the	day’s
activities,	there	is	the	chatting	with	companions,	listening	to	the	car	radio,
making	the	cell	phone	calls,	sending	text-messages,	and	reading	the	morning
newspaper	on	the	subway.	Once	at	the	destination,	there	follows	the
preoccupation	with	the	external	events	of	the	day:	the	business,	the	deals,	the
bargains,	the	arrangements,	the	worries,	the	manipulations,	the	endless	search	for
power,	the	quest	for	“strokes,”	and	the	ever-present	fear	of	survival.	All	of	this	is
motivated	by	the	desire	to	somehow	derive	meaning	and	security,	and	to
increase	our	self-esteem	and	ensure	our	self-worth	by	whatever	means.

The	franticness	of	the	struggle	is	not	really	realized	until	we	are	suddenly
forced	to	discontinue	it	by	some	external	event.	Then,	we	are	confronted	with

the	internal	emptiness.	This	calls	for	the	incessant	ingestion	of	novels,
magazines,	television,	and	websites.	Or,	the	emptiness	is	avoided	by	the	constant
going	to	parties,	escaping	through	drugs,	numbing	out	with	a	few	drinks,
watching	movies,	and	pursuing	other	amusements.	We	tend	to	do	just	about
anything	to	avoid	facing	that	feeling	of	inner	emptiness.

There	is	nothing	wrong	with	any	of	these	activities,	in	and	of	themselves.

What	we	want	to	examine	is	only	the	state	of	consciousness,	the	state	of
awareness,	and	the	manner	in	which	the	activities	are	perceived,	pursued,	and
experienced.	In	a	state	of	inner	freedom,	these	same	events	and	experiences	take
on	a	totally	different	significance.

The	identical	activities	can	stem	from	an	inner	sense	of	happiness,	self-
worth,	and	completeness.	The	same	goals	can	be	fulfilled	through	the	realization
of	our	inner	achievement	rather	than	competition	with	others.	Relationships
become	sharing	and	loving	rather	than	jealous,	competitive,	and	driven	by	the
seeking	of	“strokes”	and	approval.	When	we	are	free	of	negative	drives,	we
enjoy	gratifying	relationships	because	we	love	people,	not	because	we	are
attached	to	them.	We	can	allow	the	other	person	to	be	free,	not	subject	to
jealousy	and	threat.	We	are	not	the	victims	of	manipulation	by	others	because	we
have	already	found	an	inner	fulfillment.

As	negative	thoughts,	feelings,	and	attitudes	are	relinquished,	we	re-own	the
power	that	we	had	given	over	to	the	world.	Much	of	the	attraction	of	the	world	is
due	to	the	glamorization	that	we	have	projected	onto	it.	Questions	arise	for	self-
reflection:	“Is	it	really	all	that	money	that	I	want,	or	is	it	the	glamour	that	I	have
attached	to	it?	What	is	it	that	I	want	from	that	job	title	or	from	that	designation
of	“Dr.”	and	“Esq.”	and	“Rev.”?	Is	it	the	responsibility	and	activities	that	go
along	with	it,	or	is	it	the	glamour	and	esteem	associated	with	it?	Do	I	really	love
that	person,	or	am	I	in	love	with	the	glamour	I	have	projected	onto	him	or	her?”
The	more	we	let	go,	the	more	we	de-glamorize	the	world.	The	more	it	is	de-

glamorized,	the	less	it	runs	us.	We	are	not	at	the	effect	of	glamour	and	can	no
longer	be	manipulated	by	it.	We	are	no	longer	vulnerable	to	the	professional
programmers	of	the	media	and	the	political	and	social	arenas.	We	are	no	longer
at	the	effect	of	an	inner	need	for	approval	from	others.

We	begin	to	love	people	for	what	they	are,	not	for	what	they	can	do	for	us.

We	no	longer	need	to	exploit	others	or	try	to	win	them	over.	As	our	own	level	of
guilt	decreases,	our	self-esteem	expands.	Relationships	are	now	based	on
integrity,	and	we	are	no	longer	subject	to	emotional	blackmail.	As	a	corollary,
we	stop	trying	to	blackmail	others	with	emotional	pressure.	Because
relationships	are	based	on	honesty,	and	they	exist	and	function	on	a	higher	plane,
there	is	no	longer	a	fear	of	alienation	or	feeling	of	aloneness.	The	surrendered

person	no	longer	needs	others	for	personal	fulfillment	but	is	with	them	out	of
choice	because	of	love	and	enjoyment.	Compassion	for	others	and	for	their
humanness	transforms	life	and	all	relationships.

The	State	of	Inner	Freedom
What	does	life	become	when	one	continuously	surrenders?	What	is	possible?

In	the	surrendered	state,	we	are	independent	of	the	outer	world	as	a	source

of	satisfaction	because	the	source	of	happiness	has	been	found	within	us.
Happiness	is	shared	with	others	so	that,	in	relationships,	the	surrendered	person
is	supportive,	sympathetic,	encouraging,	patient,	and	tolerant.	There	is	an
effortless	appreciation	of	the	worth	and	values	of	others	and	a	consideration	for
their	feelings.	Power	struggles,	being	“right,”	and	proving	our	point	have	been
relinquished.	There	is	an	automatic	nonjudgmental	attitude	and	the	supporting	of
others	to	grow,	learn,	experience,	and	fulfill	their	own	potentialities.	There	is	an
easy-going,	nurturing	acceptance	of	others.	We	feel	relaxed,	vibrant,	and	full	of
energy.	Life	events	flow	automatically	and	effortlessly.	We	no	longer	respond
from	a	motive	of	sacrifice	or	“giving	up”	something	for	others;	instead,	we	see
ourselves	as	being	of	loving	service	to	others	and	the	world.	Life	events	are	seen
as	opportunities	rather	than	challenges.	The	personality	is	gentle	and	open	with	a
willingness	to	let	go	and	surrender	nonstop	because	of	the	unfolding	and
ongoing	inner	process	of	continuous	revelation.

As	the	process	unfolds,	we	feel	an	inner	transformation.	This	leads	to	a
consistent	feeling	of	gratitude,	pleasure,	and	certainty	about	our	goals.	There	is	a
living	in	the	present	rather	than	a	preoccupation	with	the	past	or	the	future.
There	is	a	trusting	defenselessness	because	the	power	that	was	projected	onto	the
world	has	been	re-owned.	There	is	an	inner	feeling	of	strength	and
invulnerability	leading	to	an	inner	serenity.

At	first,	there	is	the	identification,	“I	am	the	body.”	As	the	mechanism	of

surrender	continues,	it	becomes	quite	obvious	that,	“I	am	the	mind	that
experiences	the	body,	not	the	body.”	As	more	feelings	and	belief	systems	are
surrendered,	there	eventually	comes	the	awareness,	“I	am	not	the	mind	either,
but	that	which	witnesses	and	experiences	the	mind,	emotions,	and	body.”

Through	inner	observation,	there	is	the	realization	of	something	that	remains

constant	and	the	same,	no	matter	what	goes	on	in	the	external	world	or	with	the
body,	emotions,	or	mind.	With	this	awareness	comes	a	state	of	total	freedom.
The	inner	Self	has	been	discovered.	The	silent	state	of	Awareness	that	underlies
all	movement,	activity,	sound,	feeling,	and	thought	is	discovered	to	be	a	timeless
dimension	of	peace.	Once	identified	with	this	Awareness,	we	are	no	longer	at	the
effect	of	the	world,	the	body,	or	the	mind,	and	with	this	Awareness	come	an

inner	calmness,	stillness,	and	a	profound	sense	of	inner	peace.	We	realize	that
this	is	what	we	were	always	seeking	but	didn’t	know	it,	because	we	had	gotten
lost	in	the	maze.	We	had	mistakenly	equated	ourselves	with	the	outer
phenomena	of	our	hectic	life—the	body	and	its	experiences,	the	obligations,	the
jobs,	the	titles,	the	activities,	the	problems,	and	the	feelings.	But	now	we	realize
that	we	are	the	timeless	space	in	which	the	phenomena	are	happening.	We	are
not	the	flickering	images	playing	out	their	drama	on	the	movie	screen,	but	the
screen	itself—a	nonjudgmental	witness	of	the	unfolding	movie	of	life,	with	no
beginning	and	no	end,	infinite	in	its	potential.	These	progressive	realizations	of
our	true	nature	prepare	the	ground	for	the	Ultimate	Realization	of	the	identity	of
Consciousness	with	Divinity	Itself.

CHAPTER

18

RELATIONSHIPS

Because	they	are	so	intimately	connected	with	our	basic	desires	for	love	and
security,	relationships	quickly	bring	up	our	innermost	feelings.	For	that	reason,
they	are	extremely	valuable,	no	matter	whether	the	relationship	is	classified	as
good	or	bad.	In	the	process	of	emotional	emancipation,	everything	is	equally
valuable.	It	is	necessary	to	remind	ourselves	that	feelings	are	programs;	that	is,
they	are	learned	responses	that	often	have	a	purpose.	That	purpose	is	directly
related	to	achieving	an	effect	on	the	other	person’s	feelings	and,	by	doing	so,	to
influence	their	feelings	toward	ourselves	and	to	fulfill	our	own	inner	goals.

We	will	look	at	common	emotional	reactions	and	examine	what	their	real
purpose	is.	Emotional	reactions	have	nothing	to	do	with	love,	for	love	is	a	state
of	oneness	with	another.	Love	is	not	just	an	emotion	that	comes	and	goes.	What
often	passes	for	love	in	common	human	understanding	is	primarily	attachment,
dependency,	and	possessiveness.

Negative	Feelings
As	we	shall	see,	all	emotions	toward	others	involve	the	basic	belief	that	we	are
incomplete	within	ourselves	and,	therefore,	others	are	viewed	and	utilized	as	a
means	to	an	end.	Although	we	may	not	be	able	to	influence	the	other	person	in
the	way	we	would	like,	the	utilization	of	the	other	person	still	occurs	on	the	level
of	fantasy	and	expectation.	We	also	discover	that	much	of	what	we	experience	in
a	relationship	is	happening	only	in	our	imagination.	Let’s	start	first	with	the	most
negative	emotions;	we	will	discover	what	their	underlying	purpose	is	and	the
other	person’s	likely	response.

	
Anger

The	first	feelings	we	will	start	with	are	the	most	negative:	feelings	of	hate,
malice,	anger,	rage,	revenge,	and	violence.	It	is	obvious	that	the	underlying
fantasy	here	is	to	eliminate,	banish,	kill,	destroy,	injure,	hurt,	frighten,	and
intimidate.	The	other	person’s	likely	response	is	to	avoid	us,	to	hate	us	in	return,
and	to	bring	about	a	counter-attack.	Lesser	forms	of	anger	are	criticism,
criticalness,	resentment,	sulking,	stewing,	and	negative	judgments	about	others.
The	emotional	purpose	is	to	punish	others,	make	them	feel	sorry,	try	to	force
them	to	change	their	feelings	or	behavior,	make	them	suffer,	get	even	with	them,
diminish	and	devalue	them.	This,	of	course,	also	results	in	the	other	person’s
response	of	counter-criticism,	counter-resentment,	and	avoidance.

To	handle	this	area,	we	have	to	realize	that	almost	everyone	has	these
fantasies.	Playing	ostrich	with	them,	thinking	that	they	are	wicked	or	that	we	are
guilty,	will	not	resolve	them.	We	have	to	come	up	to	the	level	of	courage	and
look	at	our	worst	feelings,	admit	that	they	are	part	of	the	condition	of	being
human,	and	remember	that	we	are	only	held	accountable	for	what	we	do	with
them.	It	is	obvious	that	these	negative	feelings	take	an	enormous	emotional	toll
on	our	own	inner	selves.	That	reason	alone	is	sufficient	to	warrant	looking	at
them	and	letting	go	of	them.

Looking	at	the	feelings	on	the	level	of	interpersonal	relationships,	we	now
discover	another	law	of	consciousness.	Our	feelings	and	thoughts	always	have
an	effect	on	other	persons	and	affect	our	relationships,	whether	these	thoughts
or	feelings	are	verbalized,	expressed,	or	not.	We	will	not,	at	this	point,	go	into
the	discussion	of	the	mechanics	of	exactly	how	this	comes	about,	but	it	is
currently	an	area	of	research	of	modern	advanced	quantum	physics,	especially
that	area	concerned	with	high	energy	subatomic	particles	and	their	relationship
to	thoughts	and	thought	forms.

We	can	likely	intuit	the	truth	of	this	law	of	consciousness	from	our	own
experience.	We	generally	know,	for	example,	when	someone	is	angry	toward	us,
even	if	they	say	nothing	about	it.	Sensing	their	repressed	angry	feeling,	we	might
ask,	“Is	something	wrong?”	Even	when	they	reply,	“Oh	nothing,”	we	are	still
aware	of	the	energy	of	anger	and	upset.

It	is	somewhat	dismaying	to	discover	the	truth	of	this	interfacing	at	the

energetic	level,	but	anyone	can	discover	it	by	inner	investigation.	The	overall
attitudes	we	hold	about	another	person	are	influencing	that	other	person’s
feelings	and	attitudes	about	us	whether	we	express	them	or	not.	Women	in	our
society	are	more	intuitive	than	men;	they	are	generally	more	consciously	aware
that	their	thoughts	and	feelings	are	known	by	others.	True	psychics,	of	course,

are	merely	people	who	are	experts	at	intuition.

When	first	discovering	the	truth	of	this,	we	might	go	through	sort	of	a	mild
paranoia.	Most	everyone	is	brought	up	to	believe	that	our	thoughts	and	feelings
are	private	affairs	and	nobody	else’s	business,	that	all	minds	are	separated,	and
that	emotions	happen	only	within	the	confines	of	the	body.	As	we	begin	to
investigate	this	area,	we	find	that	often	the	set	of	feelings	we	hold	about	another
person	is	mirrored	back	to	us	by	their	attitude	and	that,	when	we	change	our
inner	attitude	about	them,	their	attitude	changes	abruptly.	We	are	unconsciously
influencing	others	all	the	time	because	of	the	feelings	we	hold	about	them.	As
we	become	more	intuitive,	we	will	laugh	at	our	former	naïveté.	And,	if	we
research	further	into	the	world	of	psychics	and	parapsychology,	we	will	discover
that	thoughts	and	feelings	can	be	read	by	expert	psychics,	even	from	the	other
side	of	the	globe.

The	only	way	to	get	over	this	initial	paranoia	is	to	clean	up	our	own	act.
Finding	out	what	needs	to	be	cleaned	up	is	simple	and	easy.	Just	look	at	what
you	would	not	want	others	to	know	about	you	and	begin	to	surrender	it!

With	observation,	it	is	quite	clear	that	these	intensely	negative	feelings
reverberate	and	boomerang	back	to	us,	and	profoundly	affect	our	relationships.
The	other	person	merely	mirrors	back	what	we	are	projecting	onto	them.	People
who	carry	a	lot	of	hatred	find	that	they	are	living	in	a	hateful	world	and	that	lots
of	people	hate	them.	They	see	external	situations	and	the	world	as	hateful.	What
they	fail	to	see	is	that	this	entire	situation	is	self-created.

We	have	the	secret	hope	that	our	angry	feelings	towards	others	will	punish
and	make	them	suffer.	Actually,	we	are	just	providing	them	with	justification	to
hate	us	back.	We	have	to	live	with	the	fear	of	their	retaliation	and	our	own
unconscious	guilt,	which	often	results	in	physical	sickness.	It	will	be	discovered
that	all	of	our	anger	and	resentment	are	due	to	our	perception,	that	is,	to	the	way
in	which	we	are	viewing	a	given	situation.	When	the	inner	feelings	are
relinquished,	the	way	in	which	we	see	the	situation	changes,	and	we	are	often
surprised	by	the	abruptness	with	which	feelings	of	forgiveness	suddenly	arise
and	the	relationship	becomes	transformed,	even	though	on	the	external	level	we
did	or	said	nothing	to	express	this	inner	change.

This	happens	with	great	frequency	when	our	intention	is	to	overcome	our

resentments.	A	Course	in	Miracles	is	based	on	that	precise	process	of	changing
our	view	of	a	situation	by	the	willingness	to	see	it	differently	and	to	be	forgiving.
This	is	what	was	meant	by	Jesus	Christ	when	he	spoke	of	the	miraculous	power
of	forgiveness.

Interestingly	enough,	there	is	a	scientific	basis	for	Jesus	Christ’s	admonition

to	bless	and	love	our	enemies.	On	the	level	of	energy,	the	lower	feelings	have	a

lower	vibration	frequency	and	lower	power.	When	we	are	in	lower	energy	state
such	as	anger,	hate,	violence,	guilt,	jealousy	or	any	other	negative	feelings,	we
are	psychically	vulnerable	to	the	other	person.	In	contrast,	forgiveness,	gratitude,
and	loving-kindness	have	a	much	higher	energy	vibration	and	much	greater
power.	When	we	shift	out	of	a	lower	to	a	higher	energy	pattern,	we	create	a
protective	shield	on	the	energetic	level,	as	it	were,	and	we	can	no	longer	be
psychically	vulnerable	to	that	other	person.	When	we	are	in	a	state	of	anger,	for
instance,	we	are	vulnerable	to	the	energy	depletion	brought	about	by	the	other
person’s	counter-anger.	Paradoxically,	if	we	really	want	to	affect	other	people,
then	we	ought	to	really	love	them.	Then,	their	anger	at	us	will	boomerang	back
upon	them	with	no	effect	upon	us!	This	was	the	wisdom	of	the	Buddha’s
statement	in	the	Dhammapada,	“Hate	is	not	conquered	by	hate.	Hate	is
conquered	by	love.	This	is	an	eternal	law.”

Guilt

The	next	“heavy”	area	of	negativity	is	guilt.	Here	the	underlying	purpose	is	to
placate,	to	assuage,	to	escape	punishment	by	self-punishment,	and	to	elicit
forgiveness.	The	most	important	of	these	is	the	wish	to	elicit	punishment	from
another	person,	combined	with	self-punishment.	This	is	not	a	conscious	wish;
nevertheless,	it	is	the	unconscious	purpose	of	guilt.	With	a	little	investigation,
this	can	easily	be	verified.	The	next	time	we	are	feeling	guilty	about	something
particular	regarding	another	person,	watch	what	happens	in	the	next	encounter.
Almost	inevitably,	they	will	bring	up	the	very	thing	we	are	holding	in	mind.	For
instance,	if	we	are	feeling	guilty	because	of	lateness	to	an	appointment,	that	guilt
will	frequently	elicit	a	critical	response	from	the	other	person.	By	the	holding	of
guilt,	we	bring	on	to	ourselves	all	the	criticalness	of	others	and	their	belittlement
of	us;	our	low	self-esteem	is	channeled	back	to	us	through	others	in	the	form	of
their	invalidation	of	our	life.

If	we	hold	in	mind	that	we	are	small	and	unworthy,	we	elicit	those	kinds	of

responses	from	others,	whose	remarks	tend	to	indicate	that	we	are	small	and
unworthy.	If	we	think	we	are	only	worth	a	crust	of	bread,	then	that	is	what	we
will	get.	This	is	what	the	scriptures	mean	by	the	statement,	“The	poor	get	poorer
and	the	rich	get	richer.”	Poverty	on	any	level,	not	just	financial,	comes	from
inner	poverty,	just	as	outer	wealth	comes	from	inner	wealth.	If	we	want	others	to
stop	being	critical	of	us	and	attacking	us,	the	answer	is	to	begin	letting	go	of
guilt	and	all	the	feelings	that	have	brought	it	about.

To	help	clarify	the	role	of	emotions	in	interpersonal	relationships,	a	very
quick	way	of	learning	is	to	presume	that	the	other	person	is	conscious	and	aware
of	our	inner	thoughts	and	feelings.	By	doing	this,	we	will	not	be	far	from	wrong,

for	they	are	indeed	intuitively	aware	of	our	thoughts	and	feelings,	even	if	they
are	not	consciously	aware	at	a	given	moment.	They	will	respond	to	us	as	if	they
knew	our	inner	feelings.	The	overall	relationship	will	behave	as	though	the
other	person	were	aware	of	our	inner	feelings.	If	we	are	still	holding	the
fantasy	that	other	people	do	not	know	our	thoughts	and	feelings,	just	notice	that
dogs	quickly	do!	Do	we	really	think	that	the	human	psyche	is	inferior	to	that	of	a
dog?	If	a	dog	can	quickly	read	our	total	inner	attitude,	we	can	be	sure	that	the
intuition	of	people	around	us	is	picking	up	the	same	vibration.

Apathy	and	Grief

The	feelings	of	apathy,	grief,	depression,	sorrow,	self-pity,	the	blues,
hopelessness,	and	helplessness	come	from	the	inner	program	of	“I	can’t.”	Their
purpose	is	to	elicit	sympathy,	to	win	back,	to	gain	support,	to	make	others	sorry,
and	to	summon	help.	What	is	the	effect	of	these	feelings	on	another	person?
Although	there	may	be	an	initial	attempt	to	help,	eventually	this	is	replaced	by
pity	and	finally	avoidance.	Why	avoidance?	The	avoidance	is	because	of	the
huge	energy	demand	that	we	are	making	on	the	other	person.	It	is	an	attempt	to
drain	them	by	throwing	ourselves	on	their	doorstep.	This	results	in	the	common
saying,	which	sounds	hard-hearted	but	is	unfortunately	so	often	true:	“When	you
laugh,	the	world	laughs	with	you;	but	when	you	cry,	you	cry	alone.”

Constant	grief	will	drive	others	away.	They	begin	to	resent	it	unless	they	are

in	a	very	high	place	themselves	and	capable	of	effortless	compassion.	Chronic
grief	brings	premature	aging,	a	tiredness	and	weariness	about	the	person,	and	it
can	only	be	overcome	when	we	have	the	courage	to	allow	it	to	come	up	under
appropriate	conditions	and	have	the	willingness	to	surrender	to	it	and	let	it	go.

Fear

The	feelings	of	fear—whether	tension	and	anxiety,	shyness,	self-consciousness,
caution,	holding	back,	or	distrust—have	the	purpose	of	escape	from	the
imagined	threat,	and	to	put	psychological	distance	from	the	feared	situation	or
person.	Paradoxically,	as	we	have	pointed	out	before,	because	the	fear	is
powerful,	the	very	process	of	holding	it	in	mind	can	make	that	which	is	feared
come	into	our	life.	It	is	like	a	self-fulfilling	prophecy.	The	energy	of	fear
generates	an	inner	focus	on	all	the	negative	things	that	could	happen,	and	that
focus	can	coalesce	the	appearance	of	the	very	events	that	we	fear	the	most.

Fear	in	relationships,	therefore,	is	giving	away	our	power	to	another	person

and	enabling	them	to	do	the	very	thing	that	is	feared.	The	way	out	is	to	look	at
the	worst	possible	scenario	and	look	at	the	feelings	they	arouse	and	begin	to

relinquish	them.	Like	other	emotions,	fear	can	be	unraveled	to	its	component
parts,	and	the	parts	are	then	easily	relinquished.	For	instance,	let’s	say	that	there
is	fear	of	critical	attack.	We	ask	ourselves,	“What	is	the	worst	possible
scenario?”	With	this	question,	we	see	that	the	basis	of	the	fear	is	pride.	When	the
pride	is	recognized	and	relinquished,	the	fear	automatically	dissolves.	Again,	in
a	relationship	in	which	we	are	experiencing	fear,	if	we	unravel	the	fear,	we	may
find	that	it	is	really	a	fear	of	discovery	of	our	inner	anger;	the	fear	is	that	the
other	person	will	retaliate	against	the	anger.	Again,	when	we	relinquish	the
anger,	the	fear	will	automatically	disappear.

The	insecure	person	is	fearful	and	prone	to	jealousy,	clinging,

possessiveness,	and	attachment	in	relationships,	an	approach	that	always	brings
frustration.	The	purpose	of	these	feelings	is	to	bind	and	tightly	possess	the	other,
to	achieve	security	by	preventing	loss	and,	at	times,	to	punish	the	other	for	our
own	fear	of	loss.	Again,	these	attitudes	tend	to	bring	into	manifestation	the	very
thing	that	we	are	holding	in	mind.	The	other	person,	now	feeling	pressured	by
our	energy	of	dependency	and	possessiveness,	has	an	inner	impulse	to	run	for
freedom,	to	withdraw,	to	detach	and	do	the	very	thing	that	we	fear	the	most.
These	attitudes	lead	to	constantly	wanting	to	influence	others.	Because	people
intuitively	pick	up	our	wish	to	control	them,	their	response	is	to	resist.	So	the
only	way	to	bring	about	relinquishment	of	their	resisting	us	is	to	let	go	of
wanting	to	influence	them	in	the	first	place.	This	means	letting	go	of	the	inner
fears	as	they	come	up.

Pride

Feelings	of	pride	are	often	condoned	in	our	society	and	take	the	form	of
perfectionism,	neatness,	punctuality,	dependability,	“good	personhood,”
excessive	cleanliness,	workaholism,	excessive	ambition,	success,	moral
superiority,	and	politeness.	In	its	exacerbated	forms,	we	see	arrogance,
boastfulness,	vanity,	smugness,	and	prejudice;	on	the	spiritual	level,	there	is	the
righteous	killing	of	“nonbelievers.”	The	underlying	emotional	purpose	of	these
feelings	toward	others	is	to	win	their	admiration,	avoid	criticism	or	rejection,
gain	acceptance,	be	important,	and	thereby	overcome	our	own	inner	feelings	of
worthlessness.	Unfortunately,	the	feelings	that	are	aroused	in	the	other	person
are	often	those	of	envy,	competitiveness,	or	even	hatred	and	easy	exploitation.	If
we	look	at	pride,	we	see	that	it’s	often	a	substitute	for	genuine	self-esteem.

It	is	also	of	considerable	interest	to	realize	that	the	major	relationship	to
which	many	people	apply	these	phenomena	is	the	relationship	to	God.	There	is
the	belief,	often	unconscious,	that	we	can	elicit	a	certain	response	from	God:
“God	will	feel	sorry	for	me”;	“God	will	retaliate	against	me”;	“God	will	punish

me”;	“God	will	be	pleased	with	me”;	“God	will	favor	me.”

When	we	have	adequate	self-esteem,	we	are	motivated	by	inner	humility
and	gratitude	and,	therefore,	we	have	no	need	for	the	constant	eliciting	of	strokes
and	pats	from	others	(or	God).	When	we	stop	wanting	to	be	liked,	we	find	that
we	are.	When	we	stop	catering	to	others	and	trying	to	manipulate	their	approval,
we	find	that	they	do	respect	us.	Self-denigration	in	the	forms	of	placating,
flattering,	deference,	self-effacement,	and	passivity	are	all	attempts	to	influence
others	by	catering	to	their	ego,	so	as	to	get	favorable	treatment	and	get	our	own
way.	False	humility	merely	says	to	the	other	person,	“I	am	a	small	person;	please
treat	me	that	way”	and,	of	course,	they	promptly	do.

As	is	quite	apparent,	all	of	the	above	emotions	are	manipulative	of	the	other
person	and	destructive	of	real	relationship.	They	all	diminish	our	self-esteem	for
they	are	all	positions	of	vulnerability.	Thus,	although	we	may	think	that	we	feel
well	and	secure	at	the	level	of	pride,	that	pride	is	always	accompanied	by
defensiveness	due	to	its	basic	vulnerability.	We	puff	up	with	pride	whenever	we
feel	insecure.	The	inflation	of	pride	is	easily	susceptible	to	the	puncture	of	a
passing	remark	or	raised	eyebrow.

The	Human	Condition
All	of	the	negative	feelings	are	essentially	forms	of	fear:	fear	of	loss	of	esteem
by	ourselves	or	others,	or	fear	of	not	surviving	and	a	loss	of	security.	Because
most	of	the	negative	feelings	are	accompanied	by	a	negative	value	judgment,
they	are	suppressed,	repressed,	or	projected.	Suppression,	repression,	and
projection	are	all	destructive	dynamics	and	result	in	a	progressive	stress	on	and
decline	of	our	relationships.

We	like	to	pretend	that	our	innermost	feelings	are	unknown	to	others,	but
are	they?	We	are	all	connected	to	each	other	on	the	psychic,	intuitive	level;	so,
our	feelings	are	read	and	known	by	others.	We	may	not	be	consciously	aware	of
it,	but	their	behavior	toward	us	reveals	that	they	know	our	inner	attitude	and
feelings	toward	them.

For	example,	let’s	say	that	our	external	behavior	on	the	job	is	exemplary.
Why	is	it,	we	ask,	that	the	other	person	gets	the	promotion	or	the	recognition,
and	we	do	not?	The	answer	is	to	look	at	our	hidden	inner	feelings	about	the	boss
and	the	job.	Do	we	really	think	that	he	hasn’t	registered	our	inner	envy,
criticalness,	and	resentment?	It	is	a	safe	bet	to	assume	that	others	know	our	inner
feelings	and	the	thoughts	that	go	with	those	feelings.	The	kind	of	thoughts	we
are	having	about	them	is	very	likely	matched	with	similar	thoughts	they	are
having	about	us.	If	we	realize	this	principle,	a	lot	of	things	that	happen	in	our	life
will	start	to	make	sense.	We	can	ask	ourselves,	“How	would	I	react	if	I	were	the

other	person	and	knew	exactly	what	my	personal	inner	feelings	and	thoughts
really	were?”	The	answer	to	that	will	usually	make	clear	what	the	other	person’s
behavior	is	all	about.	Perhaps	we	didn’t	get	the	promotion	because,	at	the
unspoken,	energetic	level,	our	boss	knew	that	we	were	critical	of	him,	resentful
of	our	colleagues,	and	clamoring	for	approval	and	recognition.

Before	searching	ourselves	for	negative	feelings,	it	is	best	to	remember	that

these	feelings	are	not	our	real	inner	Self.	They	are	learned	programs	we	have
inherited	from	being	humans.	Nobody	is	exempt	from	them;	everyone	from	the
highest	to	the	lowest	has	or	has	had	an	ego.	Even	the	few	who	are	enlightened
had	an	ego	at	one	time	before	it	was	finally	transcended.	This	is	the	human
condition.	To	be	able	to	observe	our	feelings	honestly	requires	a	nonjudgmental
attitude.

We	first	have	to	be	aware	of	what	is	really	going	on	inside	of	us	before	we

can	do	anything	about	it.	As	we	let	go	of	a	feeling,	it	is	replaced	by	a	higher	one.
The	only	purpose	for	recognizing	and	admitting	a	feeling	is	so	that	we	can
relinquish	it.	To	be	surrendered	means	that	we	are	willing	to	relinquish	a	feeling
by	allowing	ourselves	just	to	experience	it	and	not	to	change	it.	Resistance	is
what	keeps	it	there	in	the	first	place.

We	may	think	that	some	of	the	negative	emotions	are	necessary	to	us;
however,	upon	examination	we	will	discover	that	this	is	an	illusion.	The	higher
emotions	are	far	more	powerful	and	effective	in	bringing	about	the	fulfillment	of
our	needs.

Let’s	ask	ourselves,	for	example,	what	would	we	be	willing	to	do	for
someone	we	really,	truly	love?	We	will	instantly	see	that	it	is	almost	anything.
There	is	almost	no	limit	to	which	we	will	go	for	love.	Now	contrast	this	with
what	we	are	willing	to	do	for	someone	who	has	intimidated	us.	We	will	see	that
we	grudgingly	give	as	little	as	possible.	While	the	intimidators	may	seem	to	get
away	with	something	temporarily	on	the	surface,	they	really	have	lost	the	whole
thing,	haven’t	they?	Their	victory	is	superficial,	temporary,	and	not	even	real—a
victory	in	appearance	only.	In	the	end,	the	world	turns,	and	the	intimidators	sow
their	own	destruction.	What	we	win	by	the	negative	emotion	is	short-lived	and
inauthentic.	It	doesn’t	really	satisfy.	It’s	like	a	forced	compliment.	Real
happiness	results	from	a	win-win	situation.	The	price	of	a	win-lose	situation	is
hatred	and	low	self-esteem.	Underneath	it	all,	we	fool	neither	ourselves,	nor
others.	Others	always	know	when	we	are	out	to	exploit	them.

If	we	have	difficulty	in	relinquishing	a	feeling,	it	helps	merely	to	look	at	the
intent	of	that	feeling.	What	is	the	purpose	of	it?	What	is	the	supposed	purposeful
effect	on	the	other	person?	What	is	their	likely	response?	Do	we	really	want
that?	If	this	were	the	last	day	of	our	life,	would	that	really	be	what	we	wanted?

Well,	this	is	the	last	day	of	our	life—our	old	life	with	all	its	conflicts,	anxiety,
and	fear.	That	is	the	price	we	have	paid	for	holding	on	to	the	old.

As	we	relinquish	the	negative	suppressed	feelings	from	all	the	programs	we

have	internalized,	they	are	automatically	replaced	by	the	higher	ones.	We
become	happier	and	lighter	and	so	do	the	people	around	us.	Let’s	review	what
these	higher	feelings	are	and	what	effect	they	have	on	the	other	person’s	feelings
and	behavior	in	response	to	us.

Positive	Feelings
The	higher	feelings	of	courage,	willingness,	confidence,	capability,	“can	do,”
zest,	humor,	competence,	self-sufficiency,	and	creativity	have	an	emotional
purpose:	effective	actions,	operation,	and	accomplishment.	The	reaction	of	other
persons	will	reflect	back	to	us	cooperation,	courage,	respect,	and	a	willingness	to
be	with	us.	Additionally,	because	we	increase	their	self-esteem,	they	seek	our
company.	As	we	look	at	all	of	this,	we	see	that	there	is	a	wonderful	payoff	in
return	for	our	willingness	to	let	go	of	the	negative	feelings	that	stand	in	the	way
of	these	higher	feelings,	which	effortlessly	accomplish	our	real	goals	and
purpose.

When	we	are	operating	on	the	level	of	acceptance,	enjoyment,	warmth,
gentleness,	softness,	trustingness,	inner	truth,	and	faith,	the	emotional	purposes
to	which	the	other	person	responds	are	those	of	love,	enjoyment,	pleasure,
harmony,	peacefulness,	understanding,	and	sharing.	Their	reaction	to	us	will	be
one	of	acceptance,	satisfaction,	feeling	“in	tune,”	feeling	understood,	and	joy.
They	will	automatically	return	our	love.	It	is	rather	obvious	that	these	reciprocal
feelings	bring	about	success	in	whatever	the	venture	may	be	with	the	other
person,	whether	it	is	vocational,	social,	personal,	or	a	simple	everyday	business
interaction.

Connectedness

When	our	inner	feelings	are	of	peacefulness,	serenity,	tranquility,	stillness,
openness,	and	simplicity,	the	effect	on	other	persons	is	to	increase	their
awareness	along	with	our	own,	and	to	give	them	a	greater	sense	of	freedom,
perfection,	unity,	and	at-oneness	with	ourselves.	In	their	relationship	with	us,
they	will	feel	joined;	they	will	identify	with	us;	they	will	understand	at	a	deep
level;	and	they	will	feel	in	communion	with	us.	As	a	consequence,	they	will	seek
our	presence,	because	in	it	they	feel	complete,	recognized,	and	contented.	They
will	experience	an	increased	awareness	of	their	own	real	Self.	They	will	feel
higher	in	our	presence	or	when	they	think	of	us.	Their	response	back	to	us	will

be	that	of	love	and	gratitude	for	the	blessing	of	our	presence.	In	such	a
relationship,	goals	are	automatically	and	effortlessly	accomplished.	Because	we
are	not	holding	negativity,	there	is	nothing	we	wish	to	hide	from	the	other
person,	and	this	openness	allows	the	other	person	to	drop	all	defenses.	Nothing
is	hidden	out	of	guilt	or	fear,	and	there	is	a	very	conscious	psychic
connectedness.

It	is	on	this	level	that	so-called	telepathic	phenomena	occur	with	regularity.
When	we	are	in	total	harmony	with	another	person,	there	is	no	desire	on	our	part
to	withhold	or	guard	any	thoughts	or	feelings.	Because	the	other	person	responds
similarly,	there	is	an	effortless	knowing	of	what	is	crossing	the	other	person’s
mind	and	what	their	passing	feeling	states	may	be.	There	is	a	total	acceptance	of
our	own	humanness	and	that	of	the	other.	If	we	are	really	in	tune	with	others,	we
forgive	them	when	we	see	a	passing	jealousy	or	reactivity.	We	realize	it	is	only
natural.	And	we	know	that	they,	in	return,	are	aware	of	our	passing	resentment.
Yet,	they	are	overlooking	it;	they	accept	our	humanness,	and	they	understand	the
situation.	They	know	us	so	well	that	they	recognize	the	likelihood	of	a	passing
resentment	in	certain	situations,	but	they	know,	also,	that	we	are	going	to	let	it
go.	The	people	with	whom	we	share	a	relationship	of	loving	acceptance	are	okay
with	our	humanness	and	their	own.	No	matter	the	surface	emotions,	we	remain
aware	of	the	shared	alignment	to	love,	acceptance,	and	harmony	with	each	other
and	the	world.

This	level	of	communication	actually	can	be	reached	with	anyone.	It	does

not	have	to	be	someone	with	whom	we	are	intimately	associated.	Very	often	we
experience	it	first	with	our	friends	with	whom	there	is	less	at	stake	than	intimate
family	members.	Another	situation	where	it	often	occurs	in	the	course	of	an
average	life	is	with	an	ex-lover.	With	this	person	to	whom	we	have	revealed	so
much—now	that	there	is	no	longer	anything	romantic	at	stake—a	friendship
might	develop	in	which	it	is	no	longer	necessary	to	hide	anything.	There	can	be
truly	open	communication,	honesty,	and	integrity.	We	see	this	not	infrequently
in	couples	that	have	separated	or	divorced.	Once	the	turmoil	has	settled	down,
they	get	along	easily	and	may	even	remain	the	best	of	friends	for	many	years.

Effect	of	Positive	Feelings

It	is	obvious	that	higher	states	of	consciousness	have	a	profound	effect	on	our
relationships,	because	one	of	the	laws	of	consciousness	is	like	goes	to	like.	Our
inner	states	are	actually	radiated	to	others.	We	can	positively	affect	others	even
when	we	are	not	physically	with	them.	Feelings	are	energy	and	all	energy	gives
off	a	vibration.	We	are	like	sending	and	receiving	stations.	The	less	negativity
we	are	holding,	the	more	aware	we	can	be	of	what	others	are	really	holding

about	us.	The	more	we	love,	the	more	we	find	ourselves	surrounded	by	love.	The
replacement	of	a	negative	feeling	by	a	higher	one	accounts	for	the	many
miracles	one	can	experience	in	the	course	of	life.	These	become	more	frequent
as	one	continues	to	surrender.

As	we	surrender,	life	becomes	more	and	more	effortless.	There	is	a	constant

increase	in	happiness	and	pleasure,	which	requires	less	and	less	from	the	outer
world	to	be	experienced.	There	is	a	diminution	of	needs	and	expectations	of
others.	We	stop	looking	“out	there”	for	what	we	now	experience	as	coming	from
within	ourselves.	We	let	go	of	the	illusion	that	others	are	the	source	of	our
happiness.	Instead	of	looking	to	get	from	others,	we	now	look	to	give.	Others
now	seek	to	be	with	us,	instead	of	avoiding	us.	In	Charles	Dickens’	A	Christmas
Carol,	Scrooge	experienced	the	pleasure	of	giving	instead	of	looking	to	get	from
others.	The	joy	of	that	transformation	is	available	to	us	all.

Carl	Jung	wrote	of	the	phenomenon	called	“synchronicity,”	which	might
also	have	been	called	“simultaneity,”	to	explain	the	occurrence	of	events	that,	to
the	intellect,	appear	unrelated.	As	we	surrender	more	and	more,	this	type	of
experience	becomes	commonplace.	An	illustration	of	this	phenomenon	is	the
following	experience	related	by	a	business	executive	who	had	been	practicing
the	letting	go	technique	for	about	a	year.

I	was	President	of	a	small	corporation	with	about	fifty	employees.	We
had	built	up	a	promising	young	man	to	head	one	of	the	divisions	of	the
company.	It	turned	out,	however,	that	this	man	was	very	immature.
Instead	of	responding	with	gratitude	and	cooperation	for	all	that	was
done	for	him,	he	reacted	by	becoming	grandiose,	demanding,	and
somewhat	paranoid.	He	declared	that	he	was	going	to	barge	into	the
next	Board	of	Directors	meeting	and	cause	a	big	upset	with	his	wild
accusations	and	demands.	Although	all	of	his	accusations	could	have
been	easily	refuted,	the	whole	affair	sounded	like	a	dreadful	experience
to	live	through.	For	days,	he	appeared	just	plain	hateful	with	his	threats.
The	day	of	the	Board	meeting,	which	was	to	be	at	1	P.M.,	I	was	driving
along	the	parkway	thinking	angry	thoughts	about	him.	Suddenly	I	let	it
all	go;	I	surrendered	on	him	totally.	I	started	to	see	the	frightened	child
in	him,	and	I	started	to	send	him	love.	All	of	my	anxiety	disappeared,
and	I	felt	a	sympathetic	love	for	him.	I	looked	at	my	watch	and	it	was
12:30	P.M.	When	I	got	to	the	office,	my	secretary	said	that	this	man	had
walked	into	the	office	and	stated	that	he	was	calling	off	the	whole	thing;
he	had	changed	his	mind	at	the	last	minute.	I	asked	her	what	time	he
had	walked	into	the	office.	She	said	she	had	made	particular	note	of	the

time,	as	the	Board	meeting	was	soon	to	take	place.	She	looked	at	her
watch	when	he	had	made	his	announcement	about	his	change	of	heart.
The	time	was	exactly	12:32	P.M.

Letting	Go	of	Expectations

When	we	put	pressure	on	other	people	in	order	to	get	what	we	want,	they
automatically	resist,	because	we	are	trying	to	pressure	them.	The	harder	we
push,	the	harder	they	resist.	Even	though,	out	of	fear,	they	may	actually	concede
to	our	demands,	there	is	not	an	inner	acceptance	and,	later	on,	we	will	lose	what
we	have	gained.	This	resistance	is	in	all	of	us.	We	can	be	aware	of	it	as	it
operates	unconsciously,	and	we	evade	that	awareness	by	making	excuses	and
plausible	explanations.

As	mentioned	in	an	earlier	chapter,	in	his	book,	Winning	Through

Intimidation,	Robert	Ringer	called	it	the	“boy/girl	theory.”	(Boy	meets	girl.	As
soon	as	she	realizes	he	wants	her,	she	becomes	hard	to	get.	So	then	if	boy
decides	to	withdraw,	she	now	wants	him,	and	he	in	return	acts	aloof.)	When	we
refer	to	this	phenomenon	to	explain	sales	resistance,	one	way	around	it	is	to	take
the	view	that	our	responsibility	is	to	make	an	effort,	but	not	try	to	determine	the
result.	Another	way	is	to	surrender	the	feelings	we	have	about	what	we	want
from	the	other	person,	and	let	go	of	the	pressures	we	are	putting	on	them	in	the
form	of	expectation	and	desire.	They,	then,	have	the	psychic	space	to	become
agreeable	or	even	to	initiate	the	desired	result	on	their	own,	the	result	we	had
wished	for	in	the	first	place.

An	example	of	this	dynamic	is	a	man	who	was	working	with	the	letting	go
technique	in	the	midst	of	a	divorce.	He	and	his	wife	got	into	a	heated	argument
over	something	he	wanted.	She	just	kept	saying	“No”	to	his	request.	So	in	the
middle	of	it,	he	surrendered	on	the	object	that	he	wanted.	It	was	now	okay	with
him	if	she	didn’t	give	it	to	him,	and	it	was	okay	if	she	did.	The	instant	he	let	go
of	it	in	his	mind,	she	suddenly	turned	to	him	and	offered,	not	only	to	give	it	to
him,	but	to	have	it	packed	and	shipped	as	well.

This	illustrates	a	very	simple	but	decidedly	elegant	and	active	way	of

clarifying	relationships.	First,	look	at	how	you	are	secretly	feeling	about	a	person
in	a	given	situation.	Presume	that	the	other	person	is	aware	of	those	thoughts	and
feelings.	Then,	put	yourself	in	their	place	and	see	how	you	would	react.	You	will
see	that	their	behavior	is	probably	just	what	you	would	have	done	in	their	place.
The	goal	is	to	let	go	of	all	those	feelings	until	you	can	go	up	to	a	positive
thinking-feeling	space	about	the	matter.	Once	in	a	positive	space,	now	see	how
you	would	react	as	the	other	person	who	was	aware	of	these	new	feelings.	The
likelihood	is	that	their	behavior	will	change	just	as	you	would	expect.	There	may

be	a	time	delay;	but,	if	you	keep	watching,	the	change	will	likely	take	place.
Even	if	it	doesn’t,	you	will	no	longer	be	upset	about	the	situation.	Sometimes	the
“payoff”	refuses	to	show	up,	but	we	can	say,	“This	is	one	that	the	universe	owed
me	in	due	time.”	In	fact,	it	is	a	part	of	greatness	to	know	that	sometimes	a	good
deed	is	not	returned.

The	influence	that	our	thoughts	and	feelings	have	is,	in	the	world’s

literature,	called	“the	law	of	karma,”	or	“You	get	what	you	give,”	or	“You	reap
what	you	sow.”	Often	we	don’t	see	this	law	in	operation	because	of	the	time
delay.	For	instance,	an	acquaintance	borrowed	$200	and	then	failed	to	pay	it
back	as	promised.	For	over	a	year,	there	was	a	resentment	and	consequent
avoidance	of	the	person	because	of	the	emotional	discomfort,	which	was
compounded	by	the	guilt	at	holding	the	resentment	in	the	first	place.	Finally,
when	it	became	apparent	that	the	only	person	suffering	from	the	resentment	was
the	person	holding	it,	and	that	it	was	costing	peace	of	mind,	the	willingness	to	let
it	go	emerged.	At	that	point,	the	resentment	was	fairly	easy	to	let	go	and	the
borrower	was	forgiven.	The	$200	was	re-contextualized	as	a	loan	to	someone
who	had	been	in	need.	Within	a	few	months,	there	was	an	unexpected	encounter
with	the	person,	who	said	out	of	the	blue,	“I	have	been	concerned	about	the
money	I	owe	you.	Here’s	the	whole	$200.”	The	loan	was	repaid	without	even
asking	for	it.

We	block	receiving	what	we	want	from	others	by	our	expectations	or
resentments	of	them.	It	is	very	effective	to	surrender	our	expectations	of	others
before	we	enter	into	a	particular	situation	with	them.	Emotions	are	really	subtle
attempts	to	force	others	and	impose	our	will	on	them,	which	they	unconsciously
resist.

The	way	to	facilitate	satisfaction	in	relationships	is	lovingly	to	picture	the
best	possible	outcome.	Make	sure	it	is	mutually	beneficial:	a	win-win	situation.
Let	go	of	all	the	negative	feelings	and	merely	hold	the	picture	in	mind.	We	can
tell	if	we	are	really	surrendered	when	we	feel	okay	either	way;	it’s	okay	with	us
if	it	happens,	and	it’s	okay	with	us	if	it	doesn’t.	Therefore,	to	be	surrendered
does	not	mean	to	be	passive.	It	is	being	active	in	a	positive	way.

When	we	are	surrendered,	there	is	no	longer	the	pressure	of	time.
Frustration	comes	from	wanting	a	thing	now	instead	of	letting	it	happen
naturally	in	its	own	time.	Patience	is	an	automatic	side	effect	of	letting	go,	and
we	know	how	easy	it	is	to	get	along	with	patient	people.	Notice	that	patient
people	usually	get	what	they	want	in	the	end.

One	resistance	to	letting	go	is	the	illusion	that,	if	we	let	go	of	our

wantingness	and	our	expectations,	we	won’t	get	what	we	want.	We	fear	that	we
will	lose	it	if	we	don’t	keep	pressuring	for	it.	The	mind	has	the	idea	that	the	way

to	get	a	thing	is	to	want	it.	Actually,	if	we	examine	the	issue,	we	will	see	that
events	are	due	to	decisions,	and	choices	are	based	on	our	intentions.	What	we	get
is	the	result	of	these	choices,	even	though	they	are	unconscious,	rather	than	what
we	think	we	want.	When	we	surrender	the	pressure	of	wantingness,	we	are	clear
to	make	wiser	choices	and	decisions.

We	think	that	our	happiness	depends	on	controlling	events,	and	that	facts
are	what	upset	us.	Actually,	it	is	our	feelings	and	thoughts	about	these	facts	that
are	the	real	cause	of	our	upset.	Facts	in	and	of	themselves	are	neutral	things.	The
power	we	give	them	is	due	to	our	attitude	of	acceptance	or	non-acceptance	and
our	overall	feeling	state.	If	we	get	stuck	in	a	feeling,	it	is	because	we	still
secretly	believe	that	it	will	accomplish	something	for	us.

Sexual	Relations
Because	of	the	wide	availability	of	sexual	material	and	opportunities	for	varied
sexual	experiences,	most	people	nowadays	consider	themselves	rather	sexually
liberated.	This	liberation	is	primarily	intellectual	and	behavioral;	there	still	exists
a	great	deal	of	emotional	and	experiential	limitation,	as	well	as	sensory
restriction.	All	experience	takes	place	within	consciousness	itself;	therefore,
sexual	experience,	like	any	other,	is	determined	by	our	overall	level	of
awareness	and	inner	freedom.

The	degree	to	which	our	sexual	experience	has	been	restricted	becomes

apparent	the	more	we	relinquish	our	feelings	about	it.	When	we	are	totally
surrendered	on	sexuality,	it	is	like	adding	a	third	dimension	to	what	was	before	a
two-dimensional	experience.	As	one	woman	put	it,	“It’s	like	I	used	to	hear	only
violins,	then	a	cello	was	added,	and	then	a	flute,	and	so	on,	so	that	now	the
experience	is	totally	full	and	comprehensive.”

Besides	the	increased	emotional	pleasure	of	freedom	of	expression,	letting

go	brings	a	change	in	the	sensory	experience	itself.	To	most	people,	men
especially,	sexual	excitation	and	orgasmic	pleasure	are	primarily	a	genital
sensation.	As	one	gets	freer,	the	locale	of	the	orgasm	begins	to	expand	and
spread	to	the	whole	pelvis	and	abdomen,	the	legs	and	arms,	and	eventually	the
whole	body.	Often,	after	this	accomplishment,	there	is	a	plateau	that	follows,	and
then	suddenly	and	unexpectedly	the	orgasmic	location	expands	beyond	the	body,
as	though	the	space	around	the	body	was	having	the	orgasm	instead	of	the
person.	Ultimately,	there	is	no	limitation	of	the	orgasm.	It	seems	to	expand	into
infinity	and	be	experienced	from	no	particular	center	or	locale.	It	is	as	if	there	is
no	individual	person	present.	The	orgasm	is	experiencing	itself.

This	expansion	is	facilitated	by	becoming	aware	that	the	facial	grimacing

and	breath-holding	are	restrictions	due	to	fear	of	loss	of	control	and	attempts	to

limit	the	experience.	If	one	breathes	slowly	and	deeply,	smiling	instead	of
grimacing,	the	fear	will	become	conscious	and	can	be	surrendered.

Sexuality	loses	its	compulsiveness.	Freedom	means	not	just	freedom	to

indulge	but	freedom	not	to	have	sex	or	orgasm.	When	we	are	surrendered,	we
are	not	run	by	the	desire	for	the	orgasm.	This	unleashes	creative	experiencing
and	awareness	because	the	mind	is	not	focused	on	the	orgasm	itself.	To	be	free
from	the	domination	of	the	desire	for	orgasm	allows	sexual	experiences	that
have	been	described	in	spiritual	literature	as	“Tantric	Sex.”	Most	Westerners
read	a	little	about	it	and	perhaps	give	it	a	try,	but	then	they	give	up	because	they
approach	it	in	a	way	that	leads	to	suppression	rather	than	to	greater	freedom.
The	more	truly	liberated	we	become,	the	more	we	are	motivated	by

lovingness	rather	than	by	desire	for	gratification.	This	change	of	motivation	from
wanting	and	hunger	to	the	mutual	sharing	of	pleasure	and	happiness	brings	about
major	changes	in	the	nature	of	sexual	relationships.	The	intimacy	with	another
person	becomes	more	encompassing	and	pleasurable.	There	is	greater
attunement	to	the	other	person’s	sexuality	and	intuitive	fulfillment	of	each
other’s	styles	of	satisfaction.	One	couple	expressed	it	as	follows:

It	is	as	though	we	just	witness	what	our	bodies	are	doing.	It	is	as	though
we	are	the	space	in	which	it	is	all	happening.	As	soon	as	one	person	has
a	desire	or	fantasy,	the	other	automatically	and	without	even	thinking,
moves	into	the	acting	out	of	fulfilling	it.	It	is	as	though	there	is	a
psychic	connection.	There	is	an	acknowledgement	of	the	inner	feelings
about	the	fantasies	and	a	letting	go	of	how	the	other	person	might	react.
There	is	greater	variation	and	frequency	with	sexuality,	also.	It	used	to
be	mainly	Friday	and	Saturday	nights.	Now	making	love	may	happen
for	days	at	a	time,	or	sometimes	weeks	go	by	without	it.	It	is	always
new.	It	is	never	the	same.	Amazingly,	it	just	keeps	getting	better	and
better.	Each	orgasm	seems	better	than	the	last,	yet	often	the	lovemaking
is	so	enjoyable	that	there	is	no	bother	to	have	an	orgasm.	If	it	happens
it’s	okay,	and	it’s	okay	if	it	doesn’t.	The	intimate	time	spent	together	is
satisfying	and	freeing,	regardless	of	any	end	result.

Another	man	said:

I	never	really	realized	before	how	much	sex	ran	my	relationships.	It	was
really	compulsive.	I	was	always	afraid	I	would	miss	out	on	a	sexual
opportunity.	I	didn’t	want	to	miss	out	on	the	opportunity	for	pleasure.
Now	my	pattern	is	more	variable;	in	fact,	now	I	have	no	pattern.	When

it	happens,	it	happens	and	it’s	great	when	it	does.	When	it	doesn’t,	I
don’t	even	think	about	it.	I	used	to	have	sex	on	my	mind	all	the	time.
Women	would	usually	say	‘No.’	But	now	that	I	really	don’t	care	that
much	about	it,	they	usually	either	suggest	it	or	say	‘Yes’	if	I	ask.	Now,	I
find	that	I	am	more	concerned	about	them	instead	of	myself.	Before,	I
was	really	just	using	them	for	my	own	selfish	ends	and,	intuitively,	the
women	knew	it.	Now	I	feel	a	lot	of	love	for	them.	I	really	care	about
their	welfare	and	happiness,	even	if	it’s	only	a	single	encounter.	What	a
relief	not	to	have	to	lie	anymore.

From	the	above	examples,	it	is	clear	that	there	is	a	change	in	consciousness

from	lack	to	abundance.	When	we	are	self-centered	and	focused	on	getting
emotional	or	physical	pleasure	from	sex	with	another	person,	then	we	feel	angry,
frustrated,	and	deprived.	The	more	loving	we	become,	the	more	we	receive	what
others	are	giving	us,	and	we	discover	that	we	are	all	surrounded	by	love	and
opportunities	for	loving	involvements,	all	of	the	time.	This	was	the	case	for	one
woman,	who	shared	the	following	experience:

I	was	always	overweight	and	not	very	good-looking.	All	through	my
life,	I	rejected	myself.	I	envied	and	hated	sexually	attractive	women.	I
got	to	hate	men,	too,	because	they	avoided	me.	I	was	full	of	self-pity.	I
even	tried	psychotherapy,	but	I	quit	when	it	became	apparent	that	the
psychotherapist	seemed	more	interested	in	his	attractive	young	women
patients	than	he	was	in	me.	I	tried	various	self-help	methods	and	at	least
got	over	my	self-pity	and	depression;	I	was	able	to	get	a	better	job.	But,
men	still	weren’t	interested	in	me,	and	I	was	unsuccessful	in	the	sexual
and	relational	arenas.

Using	the	mechanism	of	letting	go,	she	went	into	all	the	negative	emotions

that	she	had	about	herself	and	intimacy;	she	allowed	the	feelings	to	come	up	one
by	one,	and	she	let	them	go.	She	let	go	of	feelings	like	wanting	attention	and
acceptance	from	others,	fear	of	expressing	herself,	fear	of	being	rejected,	and
even	the	fear	of	being	deeply	loved.	There	was	the	underlying	feeling,	“I	don’t
deserve	love;	who	could	possibly	love	me?”	Within	a	week	of	surrendering	these
feelings,	she	had	a	date.	She	explained:

I	was	so	excited	that	I	even	lost	my	appetite.	We	had	a	great	time	and
then	all	of	a	sudden	I	saw	the	secret.	I	was	giving	love	instead	of
looking	for	it.	My	whole	life	has	changed	now.	Instead	of	feeling
desperate	to	get	attention	and	love,	I	know	I	have	the	power	to	give	it.

When	I	enter	a	room,	I	see	all	the	lonely,	love-starved	men.	They	look
just	the	way	I	used	to,	so	I	know	what	it	is	they	are	feeling	and	what	to
say	to	them	and	how	to	express	myself.	I	put	myself	in	their	place	and
watch	their	hearts	melt.	I	used	to	scare	them	away	because	I	was	so
hungry.	Get	that?	Hungry!	That	was	my	problem.	Now	I	feel	full,	and	I
share	that	fullness	and	what	I	have	learned.	My	social	life	has	become
so	enjoyable	that	I	don’t	have	time	to	eat	anymore.	I	have	lost	35
pounds	in	a	year.	I	never	even	dieted.	I	just	lost	interest.	I	guess	it	is
because	I	am	getting	gratified	in	a	way	now	that	really	means
something	to	me.	Maybe	I	am	a	little	wild	with	the	newness	of	it,	but
I’ll	settle	down	before	long.	There	is	one	man	I’m	really	interested	in
now.

Sexuality,	then,	reflects	our	overall	state	of	consciousness.	As	we	let	go	of

fear	and	limitations,	that	area	of	our	life	expands	and	becomes	ever	more
gratifying,	and	yet	not	necessary	for	happiness.	Freedom	and	creativity	replace
compulsiveness	and	limitation.	Sex	becomes	another	avenue	for	greater
expression	and	increasing	awareness.	The	pleasure	of	communion	and	nonverbal
understanding	replaces	the	former	self-centered	drivenness	for	relief	from
tension	and	the	limited	goal	of	sexual	pleasure	and	ego	inflation.	The	secret,	as
the	woman	above	stated,	is	in	the	awareness	that	when	we	seek	to	give	instead	of
to	get,	all	of	our	own	needs	are	automatically	fulfilled.	As	one	person	remarked,
“I	have	heard	about	many	personal	problems	from	my	friends	who	practice	this
technique,	but	lack	of	lovers	isn’t	one	of	them!”

CHAPTER

19

ACHIEVEMENT	OF	VOCATIONAL	GOALS

Feelings	and	Abilities
Our	thoughts	determine	the	extent	to	which	we	manifest	our	talents	and	abilities,
and	they	set	the	quality	and	quantity	of	our	successes	and	failures.	But	what	is	it
that	determines	and	influences	the	direction	of	our	thoughts?	As	we	have	seen,	it
is	our	feelings	that	determine	and	produce	the	kind	of	thinking	that	will	lead	us
to	success	or	failure	in	any	endeavor.	Feelings	are	the	key	to	the	expansion	or
constriction	of	our	talents,	abilities,	and	actions.

Generally,	we	are	knowledgeable	and	well	trained	in	matters	pertaining	to
the	outer	world.	Yet	we	are	sometimes	unknowledgeable	and	untrained	in	the
inner	world,	the	world	of	feelings.	Because	feelings	determine	thoughts	and	the
thoughts	we	hold	in	mind	determine	outcomes,	it	is	important	to	clarify	the
relationship	between	our	feelings	and	the	freeing	of	our	abilities	so	that	they
result	in	successful	action.

To	summarize	what	we	have	said	about	the	scale	of	consciousness,	and	to

make	it	simple,	we	can	briefly	categorize	all	feelings	as	either	negative	or
positive	and,	of	course,	the	thoughts	that	will	result	from	them	will	be	either
negative	or	positive.

Negative	Feelings	Related	to	Work
These	feelings	are	always	unpleasant	and	range	from	mildly	uncomfortable	to
painful.	They	instigate	the	process	of	thinking	and	ideation	that	leads	to	“I	can’t”
and	“We	can’t,”	regardless	of	the	event,	situation,	or	problem	in	which	the
person	is	involved.	Negative	feelings	arise	when	we	dislike	what	we	see,	hear,

	
think,	or	remember.	Our	reaction	to	disliking	comes	in	the	form	of	such	feelings
as	anger,	grief,	and	anxiety.	Our	usual	way	of	dealing	with	unpleasant	feelings	is
to	suppress	them,	and	because	of	this,	we	assume	that	these	feelings	are	part	and
parcel	of	our	thinking	process.	This	error	results	because	the	feelings	of	dislike
are	being	processed	through	our	thoughts.	Suppressing	these	feelings	does	not
make	them	disappear.	On	the	contrary,	they	will	re-emerge	as	negative	thoughts.
Negativity	does	not	exist	within	a	situation	or	event;	rather,	it	resides	in	our
reaction	to	the	situation	as	we	see	it.	When	negative	feelings	are	acknowledged
and	relinquished,	the	situation	can	rapidly	change	in	appearance	from	impossible
to	easily	manageable,	workable,	and	even	quite	useful.

One	of	the	most	prominent	negative	feelings	that	blocks	success	in
professional	life	is	that	of	envy.	The	underlying	dynamic	of	envy	is	that	when
we	see	someone	else	getting	ahead,	this	triggers	our	own	sense	of	insecurity.	It’s
not	simply	that	we	see	the	other	person’s	achievement	and	feel	envy.	Rather,	the
other	person’s	achievement	triggers	in	us	a	feeling	of	lack	or	inadequacy	about
ourselves.	It	triggers	the	feeling,	“Maybe	I’m	not	accomplishing	what	I	should
be	accomplishing,”	or	“Maybe	I	won’t	be	able	to	accomplish	what	I	want	to
accomplish,”	or	“Maybe	my	accomplishments	aren’t	appreciated	by	others	and
go	unnoticed.”

Envy	is	painful	because	it	arouses	our	own	sense	of	inadequacy.	And	then

we	often	resent	the	person	whose	successes	have	inadvertently	provoked	this
feeling.	Unconsciously,	this	resentment	fuels	our	endless	desire	for	strokes,
which,	of	course,	do	not	come	our	way	because	our	wantingness	repels	the	very
thing	we	want.

As	the	cycle	progresses,	we	feel	increasingly	dissatisfied	and	unhappy	in
our	job	and	alienated	from	our	colleagues.	There	may	be	the	belief,	“Everyone	is
against	me.”	Our	family	members	may	grow	weary	of	our	constant	complaints
about	the	situation	at	work.	We	may	seek	escape	at	the	end	of	the	day	through
endless	television	or	over-indulgence	in	food,	sleep,	drugs,	and	alcohol.

What’s	the	way	out	of	this	cycle	of	envy	and	dissatisfaction?	As	we’ve	said

before,	the	answer	is	to	go	within.	With	envy,	we	are	constantly	looking	at
others,	evaluating	their	accomplishments,	and	comparing	ourselves	to	them.	We
see	the	cost	of	this	looking	outward	in	the	film,	Chariots	of	Fire,	when	one	of
the	runners	turned	to	see	where	his	opponent	was	in	the	race.	The	moment	he
took	his	eye	off	the	finish	line	to	compare	himself	with	another	runner,	he	lost
that	split	second	which	cost	him	the	whole	race.	The	man	who	won	the	race	was
motivated	by	the	sheer	love	of	running	and	to	do	his	best.	He	didn’t	run	to	“beat”
another.	He	didn’t	compare	himself	to	other	runners.	He	ran	his	best	because	he
loved	to	run.

When	we	look	within	ourselves,	we	see	what	the	underlying	feelings	are
that	prevent	our	success:	competitiveness,	self-doubt,	insecurity,	inadequacy,
and	desire	for	approval.	Are	we	willing	to	look	at	these	feelings?	Once	our
feelings	are	recognized,	it	becomes	obvious	to	us	that	they	work	against	us.	They
drain	our	efforts	and	impede	our	success	in	the	world.	Our	self-doubts	block	the
very	recognition	we	seek.

Once	we	see	the	cost	of	negative	feelings	to	our	happiness	and	success,	we

will	become	willing	to	let	go	of	them	and	the	payoffs	we	get	from	them.	For
example,	we	become	willing	to	let	go	of	the	cheap	little	satisfaction	we	get	from
blaming	others	for	our	lack	of	success.	We	become	willing	to	let	go	of	the
sympathy	we	garner	from	those	who	listen	to	our	complaints.	When	we	let	go	of
our	feelings	of	inadequacy,	we	will	find	that	envy	of	others	disappears.	We
become	like	the	winning	runner	in	Chariots	of	Fire	who	loves	what	he	does,
delights	in	his	success	and	that	of	others,	and	has	boundless	energy	to	excel	in
the	world.

Positive	Feelings	Related	to	Work
These	are	always	felt	as	pleasant	and	include	such	feelings	as	joy,	happiness,	and
security.	They	instigate	a	process	of	thinking	and	ideation	that	is	exemplified	by
the	thoughts	“I	can”	and	“We	can,”	regardless	of	the	event,	situation,	or	problem
in	which	the	person	is	involved.

Positive	feelings	flow	naturally	when	negative	feelings	are	not	in	action.
Nothing	needs	to	be	done	to	acquire	positive	feelings,	as	they	are	part	and	parcel
of	our	natural	state.	This	positive	inner	state	is	always	there,	and	it	is	merely
covered	over	by	suppressed	negative	feelings.

When	the	clouds	are	removed,	the	sun	shines	forth.	The	freeing	up	of
abilities,	creative	ideas,	talents,	and	resourcefulness	occurs	automatically	as	a
result	of	the	positive	state	of	mind	that	ensues	when	the	negative	aspects	have
been	surrendered.	Letting	go	of	negativity	frees	up	inspiration	to	create	an
endless	flow	of	creative	ideas.	For	example,	there	was	the	case	of	a	producer	of
an	award-winning	Broadway	musical	who	attributed	the	success	of	the	hit	show
to	the	letting	go	of	negative	feelings	through	the	mechanism	of	surrender.	There
have	been	writers,	artists,	and	musicians	who	came	into	a	sudden	breakthrough
of	inspiration	as	soon	as	a	negative	belief	or	self-limitation	was	recognized	and
surrendered.	The	same	experience	has	been	recounted	by	scientists	who
suddenly	just	“knew”	the	formula	that	would	cure	a	disease.	It	is	as	if	the	energy
field	of	creative	genius	is	available	and	waiting	for	us	as	soon	as	we	surrender
the	clouds	of	negativity	that	prevent	its	revelation	to	us.

Feelings	and	the	Decision-Making	Process
We	can	simplify	the	levels	of	consciousness	into	three	major	states:	inert,
energetic,	and	peaceful.	These	three	states	are	related	to	the	decision-making
process.	The	first	state—inertia—is	reflective	of	the	emotional	levels	of	apathy,
grief,	and	fear.	The	nature	of	these	feelings	is	to	interfere	with	our	concentration
on	the	situation	at	hand	and	engage	us	instead	in	concentration	on	our	own
thoughts,	most	of	which	are	in	the	realm	of	“I	don’t	know,”	“I’m	not	sure,”	and
“I	don’t	think	I	can.”	This	successive	concentration	of	our	own	uselessly	cycling
thoughts	renders	us	temporarily	unable	to	perceive	the	full	dimension	and
possibilities	of	the	overall	situation	at	hand.

While	these	negative	thoughts	and	feelings	are	flowing,	it	is	difficult	for	us

to	arrive	at	any	decision.	Sometimes	we	opt	to	stall	the	decision	until	we	feel
better.	At	other	times,	we	proceed	to	arrive	at	a	decision	that	we	think	will
answer	our	questions	or	take	care	of	a	situation.	Unfortunately,	the	decision	that
results	is	not	sustainable	in	the	long	run	because	it	is	based	on	the	feeling	state,
and	when	the	feeling	state	changes,	the	decision	has	to	be	changed	with	it.	This
leads	to	inner	insecurity,	ambivalence,	confusion,	and	a	loss	of	confidence	in	us
by	those	around	us.	In	the	computer	language	of	“garbage	in	and	garbage	out,”
the	negative	feeling	state	is	the	“garbage	in,”	and	the	decisions	that	come	out	of
it	must	be	on	the	same	level.

The	second	state,	which	is	higher	than	inertia,	is	that	of	being	“energetic.”

The	emotions	underlying	this	state	are	those	of	desire,	anger,	and	pride.	The
nature	of	these	feelings	is	to	interfere	less	with	concentration	than	the	previous
lower	state	because	some	positive	thoughts	are	allowed	to	flow	through	and	mix
with	the	negative	feelings.	This	is	the	state	of	the	“go-getter.”	Although	things
are	accomplished,	there	is	unevenness	of	performance	because	of	the	mixture	of
positive	and	negative	thoughts	and	ideas.	Negative	feelings	such	as	ambition,
desire,	or	“proving	oneself”	tend	to	drive	the	“go-getter,”	and	at	times	the
decision-making	is	compulsive	or	impulsive.

Characteristic	of	this	level	of	consciousness	is	personal	self-gain	as	the
primary	motivating	factor.	Therefore,	many	of	the	decisions	are	unsustainable
because	they	are	based	on	a	win-lose	situation	rather	than	on	a	win-win	situation.
A	win-win	decision	would	have	occurred	had	the	feelings	and	welfare	of	the
other	persons	involved	in	the	situation	been	taken	into	account.

Using	language	relating	to	the	body’s	energy	centers,	we	say	that	people	on

this	level	are	motivated	by	their	“solar	plexus”	(third	chakra).	This	means	that
they	seek	to	attain	success	and	to	master	the	world.	But	they	are	self-centered
and	driven	by	personal	motives,	with	little	concern	for	the	welfare	of	others	or	of

the	world	in	general.	Because	their	decisions	benefit	primarily	themselves,	their
success	is	limited	to	personal	gain.	Any	benefit	to	the	world	is	purely	secondary
and	the	results,	therefore,	fall	far	short	of	greatness.

The	third	and	highest	level	is	the	peaceful	state,	based	upon	the	feelings	of

courage,	acceptance,	and	love.	Because	these	feelings	are	purely	positive	and
non-disturbing	by	their	very	nature,	they	allow	us	to	concentrate	completely	on
the	situation	and	observe	all	of	the	relevant	details.	Because	of	an	inner	state	of
peace,	inspiration	brings	forth	ideas	that	solve	the	problem.	In	this	state,	the
mind	is	free	of	worry,	and	its	ability	to	communicate	and	concentrate	is
unimpeded.	From	this	state	come	solutions	to	problems	that	are	placed	in	a	win-
win	context;	because	everyone	benefits,	everyone	lends	their	energy	to	the
project	and	success	is	shared	by	all.	This	approach	not	infrequently	leads	to
greatness.	It	characterizes	the	noble	projects	that	bring	about	far-reaching
improvements	in	our	society.	On	this	level	we	discover	that	when	everyone’s
needs	in	a	situation	are	met,	our	own	needs	are	fulfilled	automatically.	The
unimpeded	creative	mind	will	work	out	a	solution	where	everyone	gains	and	no
one	loses.

If	we	look	at	a	situation	and	claim	that	a	win-win	solution	is	not	possible,

that	should	warn	us	that	we	have	some	un-surrendered	inner	feelings	blocking	a
possibly	perfect	solution.	We	need	to	remember	the	dictum	that	the	impossible
becomes	possible	as	soon	as	we	are	totally	surrendered	to	the	situation.

Feelings	and	Sales	Ability
Inasmuch	as	selling	is	a	part	of	many	vocations,	involving	either	a	product	or
ideas	or	our	personal	services,	it	is	rewarding	to	look	at	the	relationship	between
these	three	basic	levels	of	consciousness	and	sales	ability	itself.

The	lowest	or	inertia	state	is	governed	by	feelings	of	apathy,	grief	and	fear;
it	is	obvious	that	sales	ability	is	at	its	lowest.	Sales	persons	in	this	state	are	often
told	by	prospects	that	they	are	not	interested	in	the	product	right	now.	This	leads
immediately	to	negative	thinking	and	self-criticism	with	thoughts	such	as,	“They
don’t	want	my	product.”	The	very	nature	of	sales	activity	exposes	sales	persons
to	rejection	and	disappointment.	They	may	temporarily	escape	these	feelings,	by
taking	coffee	breaks	or	indulging	in	personal	conversation	with	other	employees;
however,	their	feelings	have	impaired	their	concentration	and	diminished	their
ability	to	produce	resourceful	ideas.	The	low	self-esteem	creates	vulnerability	to
discouragement,	which,	in	turn,	creates	expectations	of	failure.	When	thoughts
of	failure	are	held	in	mind,	failure	is	precipitated	in	the	sales	situation.	At	this
point,	by	acknowledging	the	negative	feelings	and	letting	go	of	the	payoff	from
each	of	them,	a	person	can	evolve	to	the	next	level.

The	next	level,	the	energetic	state,	is	based	on	feelings	of	desire,	anger,	and

pride.	It	includes	a	greater	degree	of	vigor	and	drive.	This	facilitates	better
concentration	on	the	work	goal;	however,	because	the	feelings	are	somewhat
driven,	there	may	be	excessive	verbalization,	with	more	time	spent	talking	to
sales	prospects	than	listening	to	them.	This	may	typically	lead	to	premature
closings,	pushing	too	hard,	and	creating	marketing	problems.	Nonetheless,
achievement	of	sales	goals	is	possible	on	this	level	because	of	the	higher
energies	invoked.	One	block	to	success	on	this	level	is	the	focus	on	self-gain	and
the	underlying	viewpoint,	“I	win;	they	lose.”	This	self-seeking	motive	is
intuitively	picked	up	by	sales	prospects	and	may	lead	to	resistance.	The	thoughts
characteristic	of	this	level	are	along	the	lines	of:	“I	want	to	get	them	to	buy	it,	so
I’ll	get	a	good	commission.”

On	the	highest	or	peaceful	level,	based	upon	the	feelings	of	courage,
acceptance,	and	love,	our	ability	to	concentrate	is	at	its	highest.	Sales	people	on
this	level	are	able	to	listen	carefully	to	the	other	person,	and	place	the	sale	in	a
context	of	what	is	beneficial	to	the	buyer	rather	than	to	the	seller.	Because	the
mind	is	peaceful	and	creative,	they	are	never	at	a	loss	for	creative	ideas	as	to
what	will	produce	sales	or	what	will	turn	problems	into	solutions.	The	person	on
this	level	often	converts	customers	to	friends,	and	the	customers	tend	to	become
loyal.	Achievement	of	sales	goals	on	this	level	is	assured	because	what	is	being
held	in	mind	is	the	positive	situation	of	win-win	and	the	inner	certainty	that	a
win-win	solution	can	be	created	in	the	situation.

Often,	surrendering	to	what	appears	to	be	an	impossible	situation	quickly
turns	into	a	positive	experience.	This	is	exemplified	by	the	case	of	someone	who
had	been	working	in	an	art	gallery.	Sales	were	slow;	she	hadn’t	made	a	sale	in
weeks.	She	tried	a	number	of	consciousness	techniques	with	herself	and	worked
very	hard	at	it.	She	utilized	visualization,	positive	thinking,	advance	sales
techniques,	and	written	affirmations;	however,	nothing	came	of	it.	Her
frustration	mounted	progressively,	with	the	accompanying	feeling,	“I	can’t.”
Finally,	in	desperation,	she	just	let	go	completely	and	surrendered	all	of	her
pent-up	feelings.	Inside	of	herself,	she	suddenly	felt	free	of	all	the	efforting,
trying,	and	striving.	The	inner	tension	disappeared	and,	instead,	she	felt	at	peace
as	she	went	to	work	that	morning	at	the	gallery.	Within	the	first	hour	at	work,
she	sold	two	copies	of	a	sculpture,	which	interestingly	enough,	was	titled
“Letting	Go.”

Executives	of	a	number	of	companies	have	documented	similar

breakthroughs.	For	instance,	a	partner	in	one	of	the	country’s	most	prestigious
accounting	firms,	after	experiencing	success	with	inner	surrender,	eventually	left
the	firm	in	order	to	share	with	others	what	he	considered	to	be	the	most

beneficial	thing	he	had	encountered	in	his	life.	He	wanted	to	introduce	the
approach	to	a	number	of	large	corporations.	He	studied	the	outcome	at	one	of	the
largest	insurance	companies	in	America.	His	study	found	that,	within	six	months
of	learning	the	technique,	the	insurance	agents’	sales	increased	by	33%	over	a
control	group.	He	concluded	that	success	in	the	world	is	related	to	our	ability	to
concentrate,	which	means	the	ability	to	keep	our	attention	on	one	thing	at	a	time
without	interference	of	other	thoughts	or	feelings.

A	mind	that	is	concentrated	on	a	positive	thought	has	the	power	to	increase

the	likelihood	that	the	positive	thought	will	materialize	in	the	world	of	events.
The	most	successful	people	in	the	world	are	those	who	hold	in	mind	the	highest
good	of	all	concerned,	including	themselves.	They	know	that	there	is	a	win-win
solution	to	every	problem.	They	are	at	peace	with	themselves,	which	allows
them	to	be	supportive	of	the	potential	and	success	of	others.	They	do	work
which	they	love,	and	so	they	feel	continually	inspired	and	creative.	They	do	not
seek	happiness;	they	have	discovered	that	happiness	is	a	by-product	of	doing
what	they	love.	A	feeling	of	personal	fulfillment	comes	naturally	from	their
positive	contribution	to	the	lives	of	others,	including	family,	friends,	groups,	and
the	world	at	large.

CHAPTER

20

PHYSICIAN,	HEAL	THYSELF

By	popular	request,	the	personal	experience	of	self-healing	has	been	shared
many	times	at	lectures,	talks,	and	workshops.	Everyone	seems	to	want	to	hear
the	story	over	and	over	again	of	how	a	physician	was	healed	of	many	diseases.
Therefore,	this	chapter	will	relate	the	highlights	of	recovery	and	healing,	because
they	illustrate	in	detail	just	how	the	principles	and	techniques	we	have	been
talking	about	actually	work	at	the	pragmatic	level.

Lived	experience	and	clinical	observation	confirm	that	the	majority	of
human	disorders	are	susceptible	to	being	cured	by	following	certain	principles.
Many	diseases	can	be	reversed	unless	there	is	a	strong	karmic	dominance	to	the
contrary.

Paradoxically,	those	serious	cases,	where	all	hope	has	been	given	up,	often
respond	promptly	and	give	the	best	results.	This	is	perhaps	because	the	person
has	finally	let	go	and	is	now	“sweetly	reasonable.”	They	are	ready	for	what
Thomas	Kuhn	calls	“a	paradigm	shift,”	that	is,	a	willingness	to	see	things
differently	from	an	expanded	perspective	and	to	be	open-minded.	Sometimes	it
takes	chronic	sickness,	suffering,	pain,	and	a	confrontation	with	the	fear	of	death
before	a	person	is	willing	to	let	go	of	cherished	beliefs	and	open	up	to	the	truth
of	clinical	reality.

Basic	Principles
This	chapter	details	the	healing	and	recovery	from	a	multitude	of	physical
illnesses	in	the	life	of	a	physician.	We	will	delineate	the	basic	principles	that
facilitated	the	process	of	self-healing.	In	doing	this,	there	will	be	a	review	of

	
some	of	the	material	we	have	already	covered,	so	as	to	bring	it	together	into	an
integrated	overall	experience.	We	will	start	with	the	basic	working	concepts:

•		A	thought	is	a	“thing.”	It	has	energy	and	form.

•		The	mind	with	its	thoughts	and	feelings	controls	the	body;	therefore,	to

heal	the	body,	thoughts	and	feelings	need	to	be	changed.

•		What	is	held	in	mind	tends	to	express	itself	through	the	body.

•		The	body	is	not	the	real	self;	it	is	like	a	puppet	controlled	by	the	mind.

•		Beliefs	that	are	unconscious	can	manifest	as	illness,	even	though	there	is

no	memory	of	the	underlying	beliefs.

•		An	illness	tends	to	result	from	suppressed	and	repressed	negative

emotions,	plus	a	thought	that	gives	it	a	specific	form	(i.e.,	consciously	or
unconsciously,	one	particular	illness	is	chosen	rather	than	another).

•		Thoughts	are	caused	by	suppressed	and	repressed	feelings.	When	a	feeling
is	let	go,	thousands	or	even	millions	of	thoughts	that	were	activated	by
that	feeling	disappear.

•		Although	a	specific	belief	can	be	cancelled	and	energy	to	it	can	be

refused,	it	is	generally	a	waste	of	time	to	try	to	change	thinking	itself.

•		We	surrender	a	feeling	by	allowing	it	be	there	without	condemning,

judging,	or	resisting	it.	We	simply	look	at	it,	observe	it,	and	allow	it	to	be
felt	without	trying	to	modify	it.	With	the	willingness	to	relinquish	a
feeling,	it	will	run	out	in	due	time.

•		A	strong	feeling	may	recur,	which	means	there	is	more	of	it	to	be

recognized	and	surrendered.

•		In	order	to	surrender	a	feeling,	sometimes	it	is	necessary	to	start	by

relinquishing	the	feeling	that	is	there	about	the	particular	emotion	(e.g.,
guilt	that	“I	shouldn’t	have	this	feeling”).

•		In	order	to	relinquish	a	feeling,	sometimes	it	is	necessary	to	acknowledge
and	let	go	of	the	underlying	payoff	of	it	(e.g.,	the	“thrill”	of	anger	and	the
“juice”	of	sympathy	from	being	a	helpless	victim).

•		Feelings	are	not	the	real	self.	Whereas	feelings	are	programs	that	come

and	go,	the	real	inner	Self	always	stays	the	same;	therefore,	it	is	necessary

to	stop	identifying	transient	feelings	as	yourself.

•		Ignore	thoughts.	They	are	merely	endless	rationalizations	of	inner

feelings.

•		No	matter	what	is	going	on	in	life,	keep	the	steadfast	intention	to

surrender	negative	feelings	as	they	arise.

•		Make	a	decision	that	freedom	is	more	desirable	than	having	a	negative

feeling.

•		Choose	to	surrender	negative	feelings	rather	than	express	them.

•		Surrender	resistance	to	and	skepticism	about	positive	feelings.

•		Relinquish	negative	feelings	but	share	positive	ones.

•		Notice	that	letting	go	is	accompanied	by	a	subtle,	overall	lighter	feeling

within	yourself.

•		Relinquishing	a	desire	does	not	mean	that	you	won’t	get	what	you	want.	It

merely	clears	the	way	for	it	to	happen.

•		Get	it	by	“osmosis.”	Put	yourself	in	the	aura	of	those	who	have	what	you

want.

•		“Like	goes	to	like.”	Associate	with	people	who	are	using	the	same	or

similar	motivation	and	who	have	the	intention	to	expand	their
consciousness	and	to	heal.

•		Be	aware	that	your	inner	state	is	known	and	transmitted.	The	people

around	you	will	intuit	what	you	are	feeling	and	thinking,	even	if	you	don’t
verbalize	it.

•		Persistence	pays	off.	Some	symptoms	or	illnesses	may	disappear

promptly;	others	may	take	months	or	years	if	the	condition	is	very
chronic.

•		Let	go	of	resisting	the	technique.	Start	the	day	with	it.	At	the	end	of	the
day,	take	time	out	to	relinquish	any	negative	feelings	left	over	from	the
day’s	activities.

•		You	are	only	subject	to	what	you	hold	in	mind.	You	are	only	subject	to	a
negative	thought	or	belief	if	you	consciously	or	unconsciously	say	that	it
applies	to	you.

•		Stop	giving	the	physical	disorder	a	name;	do	not	label	it.	A	label	is	a

whole	program.	Surrender	what	is	actually	felt,	which	are	the	sensations
themselves.	We	cannot	feel	a	disease.	A	disease	is	an	abstract	concept
held	in	the	mind.	We	cannot,	for	instance,	feel	“asthma.”	It	is	helpful	to
ask,	“What	am	I	actually	feeling?”	Simply	observe	the	physical
sensations,	such	as,	“Tightness	in	the	chest,	wheezing,	a	cough.”	It	is	not
possible,	for	example,	to	experience	the	thought,	“I’m	not	getting	enough
air.”	That	is	a	fearful	thought	in	the	mind.	It	is	a	concept,	a	whole	program
called	“asthma.”	What	is	actually	being	experienced	is	a	tension	or	a
constriction	in	the	throat	or	chest.	The	same	principle	goes	for	“ulcers”	or
any	other	disorder.	We	cannot	feel	“ulcers.”	We	feel	a	burning	or	piercing
sensation.	The	word	“ulcer”	is	a	label	and	a	program,	and	as	soon	as	we
use	that	word	to	label	our	experience,	we	identify	ourselves	with	the
whole	“ulcer”	program.	Even	the	word	“pain”	is	a	program.	In	reality,	we
are	feeling	a	specific	body	sensation.	The	process	of	self-healing	goes
more	quickly	when	we	let	go	of	labeling	or	giving	a	name	to	the	various
physical	sensations.

•		The	same	is	true	with	our	feelings.	Instead	of	putting	labels	and	names	on
feelings,	we	can	simply	feel	the	feelings	and	let	go	of	the	energy	behind
them.	It	is	not	necessary	to	label	a	feeling	“fear”	in	order	to	be	aware	of	its
energy	and	relinquish	that	energy.

The	Healing	of	Multiple	Diseases
In	the	case	of	this	physician,	there	were	so	many	illnesses	all	at	one	time	that	it
was	impossible	to	remember	them	all.	When	giving	a	lecture,	it	was	necessary	to
list	them	on	an	index	card.	All	of	the	following	illnesses	were	occurring	at	age
50:

Migraine	headaches.	Chronic	and	frequent.

Blocked	Eustachian	tubes.	Painful	earaches.

Near-sightedness	and	astigmatism.	Trifocals	were	prescribed.

Sinusitis;	postnasal	drip;	allergies.

Dermatitis,	various	types.

Gout	attacks.	Necessary	to	carry	a	cane	in	the	trunk	of	the	car	and	to

have	a	restricted	diet.

Cholesterol	problem.	Further	restrictions	in	diet.

Duodenal	ulcer.	Chronic	and	recurring	for	over	20	years,	unresponsive
to	all	medical	treatments.

Pancreatitis.	Intermittent	attacks	precipitated	by	the	recurrent	ulcer.

Gastritis;	hyperacidity;	intermittent	pylorospasm.	Therefore,	further	diet
restrictions.

Colitis,	recurring.

Diverticulitis.	An	appendicitis-type	condition	of	the	colon.	Sometimes
hemorrhaged,	requiring	hospitalization	and	blood	transfusions.

Common	problems	at	the	lower	end	of	the	gastrointestinal	tract.
Scheduled	for	surgery.

Arthritis	of	the	cervical	spine	(neck).	Displacement	of	the	fourth
cervical	vertebrae.

Low	back	syndrome,	necessitating	chiropractic	treatment.

Vibration	disease	(Raynaud’s	Syndrome).	Loss	of	sensation	and
impending	gangrene	in	finger	tips	due	to	loss	of	circulation.

Middle	age	syndrome.	Coldness	in	hands	and	feet,	loss	of	energy	and
libido,	and	depression.

Pilonidal	cyst	at	base	of	spine.	Curable	only	by	surgery.

Bronchitis	and	chronic	cough.	Aggravated	the	headaches,	spondylosis,
and	low	back	syndrome.

Poison	ivy	sensitivity.	Skin	broke	out	every	year.	Sometimes	required
hospitalization.

Athlete’s	foot.	There	was	the	belief	system	that	it	came	from	hotel	room
floors.

Dandruff.	There	was	the	belief	system	that	it	came	from	being	in	a
barbershop.

Inflammation	of	the	cartilage	(Tzietze’s	Syndrome).

A	rare	disorder,	with	painful	swelling	of	the	junction	of	the	rib	and
sternum.

Dental	and	gum	problems.	Loss	of	bone	around	the	base	of	teeth.
Surgery	was	recommended	for	the	gums.

Overall	energy	imbalance.	Kinesiologic	testing	revealed	that	all	of	the
energy	systems	were	out	of	balance,	and	every	meridian	tested	weak.

In	retrospect,	it	is	mind-boggling	how	the	body	kept	on	going	in	the	world

and	functioned	as	well	as	it	did.	Inasmuch	as	each	of	the	disorders	required	a
further	restriction	in	diet,	there	were	times	when	lettuce	and	carrots	were	about
the	only	“safe”	foods.	This	led	to	the	loss	of	25	pounds	and	a	body	that	looked
thin	and	haggard.	Later,	some	friends	revealed	that	they	had	made	bets	on	how
long	that	body	was	going	to	last.	Most	of	them	estimated	that	it	would	probably
keel	over	at	about	age	53.

The	inner	question	at	the	time	was:	How	could	a	successful,	highly	educated

professional	man,	functioning	creatively	in	the	world,	leading	a	balanced	life,
who	had	been	thoroughly	psychoanalyzed	and	experienced	many	modalities	of
therapy	and	healing,	still	have	so	many	physical	ailments?	Yes,	there	was	a	large
workload,	but	it	was	balanced	with	physical	exercise	and	creative	work	such	as
carpentry,	masonry,	woodwork,	and	architectural	design.	Moreover,	the	spiritual
life	was	active,	with	two	hours	of	meditation	every	day,	before	and	after	work.
The	endless	techniques	mentioned	in	the	Introduction	were	investigated:	self-
hypnosis,	macrobiotics,	reflexology,	iridology,	polarity	therapy,	affirmations,
astral	projection,	group	intensives,	bodywork,	relaxation,	and	so	on.

What	was	the	answer	to	this	strange	paradox	of	someone	who	had	tried	a
multitude	of	techniques,	groups,	and	therapies,	but	who	still	had	a	staggering
array	of	illnesses?	Also,	how	was	it	that	he	operated	so	successfully	in	the	world
despite	this	long	list	of	illnesses	and	the	constant	pain	that	went	with	them?	The
answer	seemed	to	be:	a	very	strong	will.	It	carried	him	through	all	obstacles	and
had	the	power	to	push	aside	anything	that	interfered	with	that	effective
functioning—in	this	case,	primarily,	feelings.	With	that	kind	of	willpower,	when
a	feeling	was	suppressed,	it	stayed	suppressed.

The	scientific	ideal	is	objectivity.	Objectivity	means	an	absence	of	emotion.

The	achievement	of	this	ideal	in	clinical	and	scientific	work	necessitated	a
suppression	of	feelings.	This	was	especially	intense	given	the	nature	of	the
clinical	practice,	which	was	with	severely	ill	people.	The	extent	of	their	suffering
and	that	of	their	families	seemed	nearly	endless.	It	went	on	relentlessly	day	after
day,	year	in	and	year	out.	The	intensity	was	compounded	by	having	a
compassionate	nature	and	being	attuned	to	people’s	suffering.	The	mounting
pressures	of	suppressed	emotion	in	all	areas	of	life	obviously	contributed	to	the
multiplicity	of	illnesses.

At	a	certain	point,	both	the	mechanism	of	surrender	and	A	Course	in
Miracles	were	investigated	and	applied	to	daily	life.	Because	of	the	busy	work
schedule,	there	was	very	little	time	for	any	new	techniques.	Happily,	the
“Workbook”	of	A	Course	in	Miracles	requires	the	simple	contemplation	of	a
sentence	or	“lesson”	throughout	the	day.	The	power	of	this	technique	is	the
alleviation	of	guilt	by	utilizing	the	mechanism	of	forgiveness.	The	mechanism	of
surrender	could	also	be	done	silently	throughout	the	day	as	an	inner	process.	The
two	tools	worked	together.	Surrendering	and	forgiving	went	on	simultaneously
during	the	day.

Once	the	mind	knows	the	way	to	alleviate	its	inner	pressure,	like	Pandora’s

box,	it	begins	to	let	all	the	garbage	up,	and	up	it	came	in	profusion!	Thoughts
and	feelings,	which	had	hardly	been	noticed	at	the	time	of	their	occurrence,	now
returned.	Life	had	been	so	busy	that	there	had	not	been	the	time	to	handle	them.
The	decompression	process	began	to	unfold	on	its	own.

One	immediate	discovery	was	that	every	negative	feeling	or	thought	is
associated	with	guilt,	and	this	guilt	is	so	all-encompassing	that	it	is	constantly
being	suppressed.	Thus,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	just	anger.	The	actual	feeling	is
anger/guilt.	There	is	guilt	every	time	we	have	a	critical	thought	about	someone.
The	mind’s	constant	judging	and	criticizing	of	the	world,	its	events	and	people,
is	an	unending	source	of	guilt.	Guilt	itself	engenders	negative	feelings,	and
negative	feelings	in	and	of	themselves	also	engender	guilt.	It	is	that	deadly
combination	which	pulls	us	all	down	and	creates	such	widespread	illness	and
unhappiness.	The	guilt	is	so	omnipresent	that	no	matter	what	we	are	doing	we
feel	somewhere	in	our	mind	that	we	“should”	be	doing	something	else.	We	have
lived	with	so	much	guilt	for	so	long	that	we	don’t	even	recognize	it	anymore,
and	somehow	that	guilt	is	projected	by	the	average	mind	onto	the	world	around
it.	That	is	why	most	people	need	an	“enemy”—an	object	on	which	to	project
their	inner	guilt.	It	is	also	where	tyrants	get	their	power,	by	manipulating
people’s	guilt	and	finding	a	satisfactory	target	for	it.

There	was	also	the	discovery	of	a	disdain	for	feelings.	Anger	surfaced	at	the

imposition	of	feelings,	which	can	make	a	person	feel	like	a	“victim.”	To	a	left-
brain	orientation,	feelings	were	the	opposite	of	reasonableness,	logic,	and
rationality.	Superimposed	on	this	was	the	male	chauvinist	idea	that	emotions
were	for	women,	children,	and	artistic	types.	Feelings	had	been	primarily	a
matter	of	intellectual	understanding	and	clinical	analysis.	When	they	came	up
internally,	they	had	been	labeled,	pigeon-holed,	and	filed	away.

At	the	beginning	of	working	with	the	letting	go	technique,	there	was	a
period	of	rebellion	and	actually	hating	the	feelings	and	experiencing	dread	over
having	to	deal	with	them.	It	seemed	degrading	to	have	to	suffer	through	them.
This	required	a	shift	of	self-concept	because	of	the	strong	identification	with	the
intellect.	Now,	like	it	or	not,	it	had	to	be	acknowledged	that	everyone	is	a
thinking/feeling	organism.	It	would	not	work	to	keep	denying	reality.

Before	long,	it	was	okay	to	have	feelings.	With	the	letting	go	technique,	the

only	way	out	was	to	acknowledge	and	relinquish	the	feelings.	This	became
easier	as	the	physical	condition	started	to	improve.	Although	it	can	initially	be
difficult	to	face	feelings	in	ourselves,	the	light	at	the	end	of	the	tunnel	had	shone
itself,	and	this	engendered	hope.

Within	days	of	using	the	technique,	the	physical	condition	at	the	lower	end

of	the	gastrointestinal	tract	promptly	healed	itself	and,	in	fact,	the	surgery	was
cancelled.	Many	of	the	symptoms	that	had	been	active	for	years,	even	decades,
began	to	diminish	in	intensity	and	frequency	as	the	months	went	by.	Migraine
headaches,	in	particular,	became	less	and	less	frequent.	Lower	back	pains
disappeared.	The	body	began	to	feel	lighter	and	stronger.

Then,	an	unexpected	crisis	came	that	brought	intense	emotional	pressure.
The	diverticulitis	returned	in	a	severe	form	with	massive	hemorrhaging.	There
was	an	inner	decision	of	great	magnitude:	“Either	this	stuff	works	or	it	doesn’t.”
So	this	time,	instead	of	going	to	the	hospital	and	getting	transfusions,	there	was
complete	surrender.	All	of	the	sensations	going	on	in	the	abdomen	were
acknowledged	and	not	resisted.	They	were	not	given	a	name	or	a	label.	Instead
of	thoughts	or	words,	there	was	a	sense	of	oneness	with	the	sensations,	the
cramps,	and	the	pain.	There	was	no	resistance	to	the	sensations,	no	matter	how
intense.	Like	being	on	a	razor’s	edge,	every	sensation	and	feeling	was
recognized	and	surrendered.	This	went	on	for	four	solid	hours.	At	the	end	of	four
hours,	the	bleeding	stopped,	the	cramps	went	away,	and	the	diverticulitis	was
healed.	Later,	there	were	some	minor	recurrences;	but	each	one	was	handled	in
the	same	way,	and	eventually	the	attacks	subsided	and	disappeared.	So	the
mechanism	of	surrender	passed	the	acid	test.	It	succeeded	where	everything	else
had	failed.	With	continued	application,	other	disorders	began	to	fade	away.

Over	time,	the	experience	of	“knowing”	replaced	thinking.	Knowing	comes

on	in	a	totally	different	manner.	It	is	just	standing	there	for	our	recognition.	One
morning	upon	waking,	there	was	the	“knowing”	of	being	cured	of	poison	ivy.	At
the	same	time,	it	was	obvious	that	the	very	name,	the	label	“poison	ivy,”	was	a
program	and	a	belief	system	in	and	of	itself.	In	any	case,	there	was	the
“knowing”	of	being	immune	to	poison	ivy,	even	when	going	outside,	touching	it,
playing	with	it,	and	putting	some	of	it	in	a	flower	pot	to	carry	to	an	interview
program	that	evening!	The	subject	of	the	interview	was:	“The	Power	of
Consciousness	in	Self-Healing.”

Another	episode	of	“knowingness”	occurred	one	day	when	unexpectedly
confronted	by	intense	insecticide	fumes.	Such	fumes	had	been	a	severe	allergy
for	many	years	and	invariably	triggered	a	severe	migraine.	On	this	particular
day,	however,	there	was	the	sudden	“knowing”	of	immunity	to	fumes.	Walking
into	a	recently	fumigated	home	and	taking	very	deep	breaths	of	the	fumes
without	any	consequences	at	all,	a	sudden	elated	feeling	of	freedom	prevailed.
How	wonderful	to	be	free	and	to	experience	the	power	of	mind!	It	was	obvious
in	that	moment	that	we	are	only	subject	to	those	things	that	we	hold	in	mind.	It	is
not	necessary	to	be	a	slave	or	victim	in	the	world.

The	same	thing	happened	with	a	long-standing	belief	about	elevated

cholesterol.	As	the	belief	and	concept	of	it	were	cancelled,	eating	dairy	products
was	resumed	with	no	negative	impact	on	cholesterol.	In	fact,	blood	testing
showed	a	progressive	lowering	of	unhealthy	cholesterol	levels!	Moreover,	food
intolerances	and	allergies	disappeared.	It	took	at	least	another	year,	however,	for
the	sugar	intolerance	and	functional	hypoglycemia	to	disappear.	For	a	period	of
time,	it	would	still	recur	under	periods	of	stress,	especially	physical	exertion,
after	eating	sugar	and	sweets	accompanied	by	caffeine.

In	the	meantime,	it	was	possible	to	return	to	a	regular	diet	after	many	years

of	severe	restrictions.	How	freeing	to	eat	foods	with	seeds	(not	allowed	with
diverticulitis),	all	the	foods	that	were	supposed	to	be	contraindicated	for	ulcers
and	colitis,	and	even	hot	fudge	sundaes!	It	took	a	couple	of	years	for	the
functional	hypoglycemia	to	disappear,	but	eventually	it	was	possible	to	eat	all	of
the	sweets	that	had	been	forbidden	for	years.

The	whole	middle	age	syndrome	was	a	belief	system	as	well.	As	this	belief
system	was	cancelled	and	surrendered,	the	coldness	disappeared	from	the	hands
and	feet.	The	fatigue,	mild	depression,	and	irritability	also	disappeared.	Physical
stamina	increased	and	the	tolerance	for	physical	work	became	almost	unlimited.
Now	that	the	more	major	things	were	out	of	the	way,	some	of	the	minor

ailments	were	consciously	addressed.	The	belief	in	pilonidal	cyst	was
surrendered.	In	six	weeks,	it	disappeared.	The	Eustachian	tube,	which	always
blocked	when	flying	in	airplanes,	caused	severe	pain	in	the	right	ear.	It	took	two

years	to	correct	itself.	There	was	a	continual	letting	go	of	all	thoughts	and
feelings	about	it	and,	at	the	same	time,	the	use	of	visualization	in	which	the
angle	of	the	canal	with	the	right	temple	bone	was	pictured	as	changing	to	a
normal	angle.	This	was	the	only	ailment	with	which	visualization	was	used.	At
the	end	of	two	years,	the	ailment	disappeared,	and	there	was	never	any	further
difficulty	in	clearing	the	ears	with	changes	in	altitude.

In	the	meantime,	the	neck	pains	were	progressively	disappearing,	and	this
made	dancing	possible.	While	dancing	and	surrendering	any	resistance	to	the
neck	pain,	soon	the	body	began	to	automatically	put	itself	into	self-healing
postures	and	movements,	as	though	there	were	an	inner	chiropractor
manipulating	the	spine.	It	was	an	uncanny	sensation,	as	though	invisible	healers
were	realigning	the	spine.

As	this	was	going	on,	there	were	changes	in	circulation	occurring	in	the
hands	and	feet,	and	they	were	no	longer	cold	all	the	time.	The	vibration	disease
in	the	fingertips,	which	had	been	threatening	gangrene,	now	reversed	itself.	The
pads	on	the	fingertips	swelled	back	out	and	turned	pink	again.	The	burning	pain
in	the	fingertips	disappeared.	Sensation	returned.	Up	to	that	time,	the	fingers	had
become	so	numb	that	it	was	not	possible	to	turn	the	pages	of	a	book.

As	the	more	serious	ailments	were	healed,	there	was	the	energy	and	time	to

look	at	even	more	minor	issues.	There	had	been	a	long-standing	belief	that
people	catch	dandruff	in	barbershops.	When	that	belief	was	surrendered,	the
dandruff	disappeared.	A	similar	process	occurred	with	the	belief	that	correlated
athlete’s	foot	with	hotel	room	floors.	Upon	continual	cancellation	of	that	belief,
athlete’s	foot	disappeared.

At	Thanksgiving	time	one	year,	there	was	the	opportunity	to	test	the

technique	in	an	acute	situation.	A	huge	log	dropped	on	the	left	foot	and	broke	all
the	bones	across	the	whole	forefoot.	Instead	of	rushing	out	to	get	a	cast,	the
letting	go	technique	was	used.	By	Christmas,	it	was	possible	to	return	to	the
dance	floor.	At	a	later	time,	a	severely	sprained	ankle	healed	itself	in	minutes	by
instantly	surrendering	the	pain.

Healing	of	Vision
One	evening	while	giving	a	lecture	on	the	mechanism	of	surrender	and	making
note	of	all	of	the	above	healings	which	had	been	experienced,	a	member	of	the
audience	said,	“Doctor,	if	you	healed	all	of	those	ailments,	then	why	do	you	still
wear	glasses?	Couldn’t	poor	eyesight	be	healed	the	same	way?”

“Well,	I	never	thought	of	wearing	glasses	as	a	disease.	I	always	thought	of	it

as	an	anatomical-structural	defect	of	the	body.	But	now	that	you	mention	it,	I
don’t	see	any	reason	why	that	shouldn’t	heal.”

So,	the	bifocals	were	removed	and	stowed	in	a	coat	pocket.	Indeed,	at	that
time,	eyesight	was	declining	to	the	point	that	trifocals	had	been	prescribed	and
ordered.	In	leaving	the	lecture	that	evening,	the	same	inner	knowingness	came,
that	the	condition	would	heal	itself	with	sufficient	faith	and	trust.

Driving	home	without	glasses,	vision	was	blurred.	The	pace	was	slow,	with

headlights	on	the	curb.	There	was	an	inner	knowingness	that	we	would	always
see	what	we	needed	to	see	but	unable	to	see	what	we	wanted	to	see.	During	the
next	six	weeks,	a	great	deal	was	observed	and	learned	about	what	goes	on
behind	our	everyday,	ordinary	seeing.	There	is	a	whole	myriad	of	feelings,
varying	from	curiosity	to	competition	to	erotic	interest	to	intellectual	titillation.
Only	about	five	percent	of	our	vision	is	absolutely	necessary	to	function	in	the
world.

A	peculiar	phenomenon	occurred;	only	that	which	was	necessary	to	see	was

seen.	Reading	newspapers	and	magazines,	watching	television,	or	going	to	the
movies	were	all	impossible.	It	became	clear	how	most	of	vision	is	merely
escapism.	On	the	road,	it	was	as	if	Mr.	Magoo	were	behind	the	wheel.	Again	and
again	that	same	mysterious	phenomenon	would	occur.	As	soon	as	it	was	vital	to
see	something,	that’s	when	it	would	be	seen.	The	edge	of	the	cliff	was	made
visible	just	as	it	was	necessary	to	see	it.	There	was	a	great	deal	of	anxiety,	with	a
constant	surrendering	of	fear.	Finally,	by	the	end	of	six	weeks,	the	fear	seemed
to	run	out.	Instead,	a	deep	surrender	took	place.	“Well,	I	will	only	see	that	which
I	am	allowed	to	see.”	The	other	emotional	objectives	which	seeing	had
subserved	up	to	that	time	were	willingly	surrendered.

Then,	a	profound	sense	of	inner	stillness	and	peace	occurred	and	a	feeling	of

oneness	with	whatever	it	is	that	runs	the	universe.	And	in	that	instant,	suddenly,
vision	returned	totally	and	perfectly.	What	had	not	been	visible	or	readable	now
was	crystal	clear:	street	signs,	fine	print	in	dim	light,	objects	in	great	detail
across	the	room	and	at	great	distance.	At	the	next	eye	test	for	a	driving	license
renewal,	the	evaluator	said	that	the	vision	was	perfect	and	that	glasses	would	no
longer	be	required.	This	had	never	occurred	on	any	previous	eye	test!

Since	telling	this	story	around	the	country,	quite	a	number	of	other	people

have	taken	off	their	glasses	and	gone	through	the	same	experience.	Interestingly
enough,	each	one	said	that	it	took	about	six	weeks.	One	of	the	people	who
accomplished	this	decided	to	put	his	glasses	on	again.	When	asked	the	reason,	he
said	that	his	wife	was	so	used	to	seeing	him	with	glasses	that	he	looked	homely
without	them,	and	so	he	put	on	blank	ones	in	order	to	please	her.	He	did	it	just
because	he	loved	her	and	wanted	to	make	her	happy,	which	is	a	very	different
reason	than	having	to	wear	glasses	because	of	impaired	vision.

Those	of	us	who	have	had	the	experience	of	healed	vision	agree	on	one

discovery:	It	is	with	the	mind	itself	that	we	see,	not	the	eyeballs!	Recently,	one
of	the	cases	was	a	woman	who	had	been	blind	since	shortly	after	birth	and	had
gross	derangements	of	both	eyeballs.	After	hearing	the	lecture	on	recovery	of
vision,	she	pursued	a	medical	protocol	and	practiced	the	letting	go	technique	on
her	sight.	Within	two	days	she	began	to	experience	a	return	of	vision.	She	came
up	after	the	lecture	and	said,	“I	know	you	are	right.	I	know	that	one	sees	through
the	mind	because	that	is	what	is	happening	to	me.	I	am	seeing,	and	I	am	seeing
with	my	mind!”

To	understand	how	all	of	these	healings	can	come	about—some	of	them

verging	on	the	miraculous—we	have	to	revise	many	of	our	thoughts	about
bodily	processes,	the	mechanisms	of	healing,	and	how	medical	treatments	bring
about	their	results.	It	was	discovered	that	there	is	a	self-healing	power	within
that	is	activated	by	continual	surrender.

CHAPTER

21

QUESTIONS	AND	ANSWERS

This	chapter	includes	verbatim	questions	and	answers	from	workshops	and
seminars	that	have	been	given	around	the	world	in	recent	years.	In	anticipation
of	the	reader’s	questions,	the	most	typical	and	frequently	asked	questions	about
the	mechanism	of	surrender	have	been	included.

Religious	and	Spiritual	Goals
There	are	always	a	number	of	questions	regarding	the	application	of	surrender	to
achieving	what	are	generally	referred	to	as	spiritual	goals,	expansion	of
consciousness,	and	religious	beliefs.	We	can	answer	many	of	these	questions	by
making	a	general	statement.

The	letting	go	mechanism	does	not	conflict	with	any	religion	or	spiritual
pathway	or	self-improvement	program,	nor	does	it	disagree	with	any	philosophy
or	metaphysical	position.	It	entails	no	spiritual	teachings	of	its	own.	Instead,	it
provides	a	mechanism	so	that	self-understanding	removes	the	blocks	to	spiritual
advancement.	It	is	also	compatible	with	the	humanistic	movement.	All	spiritual
pathways	and	religions	emphasize	the	need	for	expanding	our	capacity	to	love,
and	this	is	essentially	what	the	process	of	surrender	is	all	about.	By	removing	the
blocks	to	love,	the	capacity	to	love	self,	others,	and	God	is	expanded.

Surrender	also	facilitates	the	basic	teachings	of	all	the	world’s	great
religions.	The	essential	goal	of	these	teachings	is	to	surrender	the	“small	self,”
commonly	called	“ego.”	The	letting	go	technique	facilitates	the	goal	of
dissolving	the	small	self	by	using	a	simple	inner	process	of	surrender.	When	the
small	self	is	transcended,	the	true	inner	Self	shines	forth.	Let	us	take,	for

	
instance,	the	most	common	short	means	of	expression	of	this	surrendering
phenomenon	as	given	by	most	religions.	Typically,	they	follow	this	pattern:

Let	go	and	let	God.
Be	still	and	know	that	I	am	God.
Turn	your	life	and	will	over	to	the	care	of	God	as	you	understand	Him.
Surrender	to	what	is,	for	God	is	in	all	things.
It	is	obvious	that	letting	go	of	negativity	facilitates	the	very	direction	that	all

religions	and	spiritual	pathways	urge	us	to	take.	The	process	of	letting	go	is
concerned	primarily	with	feelings,	and	we	have	seen	that	feelings	have	a
profound	effect	on	our	thoughts	and	belief	systems.	The	experience	of	most
people	who	use	the	mechanism	of	surrender	is	that	it	facilitates	their	spiritual
and	religious	goals.	Those	who	do	not	consciously	have	any	religious	or	spiritual
goals	have	remarked	that	it	facilitates	their	capacity	for	lovingness,	which
substantially	increases	their	happiness	and	well-being.

Carl	Jung	pointed	out	that,	because	God	is	one	of	the	major	archetypes	in
the	unconscious,	each	person	has	to	take	a	position	about	God	whether	they	like
it	or	not.	Even	the	atheist	has	feelings	about	the	concept	of	God.	So	whether	God
exists	or	not,	the	subject	has	to	be	dealt	with	sooner	or	later.	Suppressing	our
feelings	about	God	or	consciously	being	overwhelmed	by	the	subject	is	not	a
satisfactory	solution.	The	letting	go	technique	brings	resolution	to	long-standing
inner	conflicts,	both	to	the	atheist	and	to	the	believer.

Question:	What	is	the	relationship	of	letting	go	to	the	whole	concept	of
sin?

Answer:	If	we	examine	the	negative	feelings	that	we	have	been
discussing	and	describe	them	in	religious	terminology,	we	see	that	what
we	have	really	been	describing	are	the	so-called	“cardinal	sins.”
Inasmuch	as	the	mechanism	of	surrender	is	a	way	of	letting	them	go,	it
seems	obvious	that	letting	go	of	the	attachment	to	these	characteristics
facilitates	the	achievement	of	religious	teachings	in	our	personal	life.

Question:	I	am	not	a	follower	of	any	particular	spiritual	pathway	but
have	my	own	personal	pathway.	How	could	this	technique	be	helpful?

Answer:	Without	exception,	all	spiritual	pathways	are	based	upon	a
method	of	dissolving	the	ego.	The	ego	includes	the	totality	of	our
negative	programs.	Surrendering	is	the	process	par	excellence	for
letting	go	of	negative	programs.	It	is,	therefore,	the	best	tool	to	facilitate
spiritual	understanding.

Question:	Will	this	process	interfere	in	any	way	with	my	faith?

Answer:	On	the	contrary:	What	are	the	obstacles	to	faith?	You	will
notice	that	they	are	all	forms	of	negativity.	Consequently,	letting	go	of
negativity	would	be	removing	the	obstacles	to	faith.

Question:	I	am	a	nonbeliever,	but	I	do	have	an	interest	in	learning	about
spiritual	matters.	Would	this	approach	be	of	any	use	to	me?

Answer:	The	mechanism	of	surrender	is	a	tool	only.	You	can	use	it	to
remove	the	obstacles	to	making	a	million	dollars;	or	you	can	use	it	to
remove	the	obstacles	to	the	development	of	spiritual	awareness.	Most
people	who	continuously	surrender	report	that	they	discover	something
within	themselves	akin	to	love	itself,	which	is	independent	of	the	body,
emotions,	thoughts,	and	the	events	of	the	world.	Have	you	ever	heard	of
anyone	becoming	displeased	by	this	discovery?

Question:	Does	the	letting	go	technique	contradict	any	spiritual	or
religious	teachings?

Answer:	A	study	of	the	subject	reveals	that	there	is	no	conflict	between
the	letting	go	of	negativity	and	any	spiritual	teaching.

Question:	I	gave	up	religion	many	years	ago	because	it	created	so	much
guilt	I	couldn’t	handle	it.	What	would	be	the	effect	of	using	the	letting
go	technique?

Answer:	In	clinical	observations	over	the	years,	guilt	emerges	as	the
most	frequent	reason	for	which	people	give	up	their	religion.	It	is
because	the	goals	seem	unobtainable.	Ask	yourself	what	has	made	these
goals	seem	unobtainable.	It	will	always	be	the	disparity	between	what
one	is	taught	they	should	be,	as	compared	to	what	they	perceive	they
really	are.	Instead	of	feeling	guilty,	try	letting	go	of	all	the	negative
feelings	that	come	up	and	wait	and	see	for	yourself	what	change	of
attitudes	might	occur.	Again,	letting	go	is	a	tool.	It	can	be	utilized	to
facilitate	your	goals	in	any	area	of	life.	How	you	use	it	is	up	to	you.	A
good	place	to	start	is	to	let	go	of	all	of	your	guilt	since	it	fosters	an
emotional	environment	for	suffering	and	disease.

Meditation	and	Inner	Techniques

Question:	How	does	letting	go	and	surrendering	correlate	with	the
different	meditative	techniques?

Answer:	Almost	all	meditative	techniques	have	as	their	goal	the
quieting	of	the	mind.	This	is	the	basis	of	the	dictum	from	the	Book	of
Psalms,	“Be	still	and	know	that	I	am	God.”	As	most	meditators	have
discovered,	achieving	silence	of	the	mind	is	the	main	problem	of
meditation	itself.	This	is	because	suppressed	feelings	constantly
produce	thoughts,	which	are	the	main	distractions	in	meditation.
Acknowledging	and	letting	go	of	the	energy	behind	these	suppressed
feelings,	therefore,	facilitates	the	goal	of	meditation.	When	the	feeling
behind	the	train	of	thoughts	is	located	and	surrendered,	then	that	entire
train	of	thought	instantly	stops.

By	constantly	surrendering,	it	is	possible	to	arrive	at	an	extremely
silent	state	of	mind.	This	can	be	accomplished	as	one	goes	about	one’s
daily	activities,	thus	greatly	expanding	the	capacity	to	meditate.	Most
meditative	techniques	are	limited	to	a	specified	number	of	minutes	or
hours	during	the	day.	It	is	possible	by	constant	surrender	to	reach	high
states	of	consciousness.

Question:	I	do	not	follow	a	spiritual	pathway,	but	I	do	affirmations	and
visualizations.	Will	the	letting	go	technique	be	of	use	to	me?

Answer:	Letting	go	greatly	facilitates	the	power	of	affirmations.	An
affirmation	is	a	positive	statement.	Its	power	is	limited	by	the	fact	that,
either	consciously	or	unconsciously,	we	have	multiple	negative
programs	that	are	saying	the	very	opposite	thing	to	the	affirmation.	You
can	discover	this	for	yourself	by	noticing	that,	as	you	write	the
affirmations,	your	mind	comes	up	with,	“Yeah,	but	…	”	It	is	these
“Yeah,	buts	…	”	that	limit	the	power	of	the	affirmation	and	reduce	its
effectiveness.	If	you	surrender	the	obstacles	to	the	affirmation,	you	will
notice	a	rapid	increase	in	their	effectiveness.

Psychotherapy

Question:	I	am	in	psychoanalysis.	Would	the	letting	go	technique	be
helpful	or	would	it	be	in	conflict	with	my	analysis,	which	is	getting
progressively	more	expensive?

Answer:	Therapists	who	have	studied	the	technique	agree	with	it.	Many
psychiatrists,	psychologists,	and	therapists	have	learned	it	and	utilize	it
in	their	practices.	So	far,	we	have	heard	only	100%	positive	evaluations
of	the	results,	because	the	so-called	“working	through”	is	facilitated	by
the	patient’s	capacity	to	let	go	of	negativity	and	self-limitations,	which

allows	the	therapy	to	move	forward	much	more	rapidly.
Psychotherapists,	themselves,	have	found	that	letting	go	has	greatly
facilitated	their	understanding	of	patients	and	the	resolution	of	counter-
transference.	If	therapists	know	how	to	acknowledge	and	let	go	of
negative	feelings,	then	they	can	avoid	the	development	of	many	stress-
related	illnesses	during	the	course	of	their	practice.	Thus,	the	technique
is	considered	to	be	of	assistance	in	psychotherapy,	increasing	its
effectiveness	and	the	satisfactoriness	of	its	outcome.

Question:	I	am	in	group	psychotherapy.	How	would	that	work	with	the
mechanism	of	surrender?

Answer:	Just	as	in	individual	psychotherapy,	the	capability	of
surrendering	one’s	inner	negative	feelings	greatly	facilitates	group
work.

Question:	I	am	a	Jungian	analyst.	Would	this	approach	fit	in	with	my
work?

Answer:	Through	surrender,	we	can	free	ourselves	from	being	at	the
effect	of	the	archetypes.	The	archetypes	are	obviously	a	collection	of
beliefs	and	feelings	and	are,	therefore,	programs	like	any	other.	The
individual	who	uses	the	mechanism	of	surrender	to	let	go	of
programmed	beliefs	and	feelings	has	the	power	of	choice	over	the
archetypal	patterns,	rather	than	unconsciously	being	run	by	them.

Alcoholism	and	Drug	Addiction

Question:	I	am	a	member	of	Alcoholics	Anonymous	(A.A.),	and	I
would	like	to	know	if	others	in	A.A.	have	benefited	from	this	technique.

Answer:	The	common	experience	is	that	the	technique	of	letting	go
greatly	facilitates	working	the	12	Steps	of	Alcoholics	Anonymous,
especially	the	Third	Step.	The	Third	Step	states,	“Made	a	decision	to
turn	our	will	and	lives	over	to	the	care	of	God	as	we	understood	Him.”
This	very	step	is	frustrating	to	many	people	in	A.A.	because	there	is	no
how-to.	Just	how	do	you	turn	your	will	and	life	over	to	the	care	of	God
or	some	Higher	Power?	If	we	look	at	will,	we	see	that	it	is	desire.	This
desire	is	connected	to	attachments.	The	mechanism	of	surrender,
therefore,	facilitates	freedom	from	attachments	and	is	almost	equal	to
the	Third	Step	in	its	intention.	Surrendering	to	God	means	letting	go	of
one’s	willfulness.	Willfulness	is	the	ego	itself.

The	obsession	to	drink	is	a	drivenness,	a	compulsion	due	to	an

attachment.	This	can	be	weakened	and	lessened	by	the	process	of
surrendering.	Drinking	is	also	an	escape	from	the	pain	of	negative
feelings;	therefore,	letting	go	of	negative	feelings	decreases	the
psychological	need	for	escape	in	that	particular	form.	This	applies	to
other	drugs	as	well,	which	are	all	attempts	to	replace	a	lower	feeling
with	a	higher	feeling.

The	letting	go	technique	does	not	replace	the	need	for	self-help
groups	or	for	Alcoholics	Anonymous;	however,	it	greatly	facilitates
success	in	recovery	programs	and	is	certainly	compatible	with	all	the
anonymous	groups,	which	are	based	uniformly	on	the	12	Steps.

Relationships

Question:	I’ve	been	on	a	spiritual	path	for	many	years	and	do	not
understand	why	I	still	experience	negative	emotions.

Answer:	There’s	a	common	illusion	that	spiritually	evolved,	loving
people	never	have	any	negativity,	as	though	they	are	already	angelic.
They	get	annoyed	that	they	still	have	negative	feelings,	and	then	it’s
compounded	by	their	guilt	and	self-frustration.	They	have	to	realize	that
feelings	are	transitory,	whereas	their	intention	to	evolve	remains
constant.	Let	go	of	feeling	guilty	that	you	are	still	just	an	ordinary
human	despite	your	angelic	ambitions!	Having	compassion	towards
your	innate	humanness,	its	nervous	system,	and	the	brain	function	that
goes	with	it	allows	for	greater	equanimity.	Heavenly	ambitions	do	not
necessarily	make	us	angels!

Question:	I	have	a	colleague	at	work	who	doesn’t	carry	his	load.	Every
time	I	see	him,	I	feel	resentful.	Then,	I	feel	guilty	for	resenting	him.
How	would	I	begin	the	letting	go	technique	in	that	situation?

Answer:	We	notice	and	accept	what	our	feelings	are	about	a	situation,
and	then	we	proceed	to	clear	them	as	a	priority	rather	than	indulge	in
emotionality.	In	the	workplace,	many	people	think	they	should	suppress
their	feelings	of	resentment;	however,	this	approach	does	not	handle	the
problem	and	the	tensions	will	fester.	With	the	letting	go	technique,	go
within	yourself	and	acknowledge	the	negative	feelings	as	they	arise.	Let
them	come	up	without	suppressing	them	and	without	venting	them.
And	then	shift	your	attention	from	the	feelings	to	something	else.	Let
the	feelings	be	there	and	let	them	go.

Question:	You	recommend	that	we	shift	attention	away	from	the
negative	feeling.	How	is	this	different	from	repressing	the	feeling?

Answer:	Repression	is	an	unconscious	process	by	which	unaccepted
feelings	are	put	out	of	awareness	and	not	dealt	with.	In	shifting
attention,	you	make	a	choice	not	to	indulge	the	negative	emotion.	You
have	already	acknowledged	and	accepted	the	feeling	within	yourself	as
part	of	being	human,	but	you	are	choosing	to	let	it	go	because	you	want
something	higher,	like	peacefulness,	harmony,	and	getting	the	job	done.
People	will	sometimes	shift	their	attention	by	way	of	actions	such	as
rearranging	the	furniture	a	little	bit,	opening	and	closing	the	window
shades,	making	a	quick	trip	to	the	bathroom,	or	going	for	a	short	coffee
break.	These	actions	allow	for	a	moment	to	shift	from	the	negative	to
the	positive.

Question:	I	notice	there	are	certain	feelings	that	seem	to	recur
frequently,	even	though	I	use	the	method	with	regularity.

Answer:	The	frequent	recurrence	of	negative	feelings	would	indicate
the	necessity	for	a	period	of	contemplation	about	recurrent	patterns.	For
instance,	the	manner	of	handling	negative	emotions	may	follow
parental	or	family	patterns,	as	well	as	cultural	ones.	There	is	a	wide
variation	among	cultures	in	how	to	handle	feelings.	So,	look	at	the
unconscious	underlying	patterns	going	on	with	your	emotional
response,	and	let	go	of	those	patterns.

Question:	What	if	a	negative	feeling	toward	someone	or	a	situation
persists,	despite	my	intention	and	effort	to	let	it	go?

Answer:	Sometimes	one	is	more	or	less	forced	to	surrender	to	a
situation	and	presume	that	it’s	karmic.	With	spiritual	research,	one	finds
out	that	it	is	indeed	karmic.	Let’s	say	you	are	paying	off	the	karma	of
being	mean	to	a	lot	of	people!	Now	you	get	a	chance	to	see	what	it’s
like	to	have	people	be	mean	to	you.	Sometimes	the	only	reasonable
thing	left	to	do	is	to	surrender	to	karmic	patterns.	You	don’t	have	to
believe	in	karma	as	a	religious	doctrine	in	order	to	make	this	step.	It’s
simply	accepting	the	basic	law	of	human	interactions	that	“what	goes
around	comes	around,”	and	most	of	us	have	not	always	been	saints!

Question:	I’m	a	teacher	and	sometimes	there	are	students	who	annoy
me.	As	their	teacher	I	want	to	get	over	the	annoyance	so	I	can	be

helpful	to	them.	What	do	you	recommend?

Answer:	First,	accept	the	fact	that	you	are	annoyed,	and	that	it’s	okay	to
be	annoyed.	It’s	the	price	of	human	consciousness.	Let	the	annoyance
come	up	fully	without	calling	it	anything	or	making	it	personal.	Instead
of	resisting	it,	you	ask	for	more	of	it.	See	that	it’s	simply	the	energy	of
negativity.	That	observation	depersonalizes	it.	Then	ask	yourself,	are
you	willing	to	let	go	of	this	energy?	Often	the	energy	will	lift.

Question:	I	have	a	good	marriage	but	there	are	moments	of	annoyance,
frustration,	and	disagreement.	How	do	I	deal	with	feeling	frustrated	and
annoyed	at	my	spouse?

Answer:	We’ve	already	said	that	it’s	okay	to	be	annoyed.	That	is	part	of
being	human.	What	you	do	is	become	familiar	with	what	the	other
person	is	processing	and	their	style	of	expression.	There	are	often
different	attitudes	and	preferences.	Very	common	differences	are
preferences	over	room	temperature,	volume	settings,	and	how	to	spend
money.	The	key	is	to	let	go	of	being	judgmental	of	the	other	person’s
preferences	or	feeling	prideful	about	your	own	as	“the	right	way.”	Each
accepts	the	humanness	of	the	other	and	that,	of	course,	there	are
sometimes	going	to	be	different	attitudes.

Question:	Such	seemingly	minor	differences	often	lead	to	the	downfall
of	a	relationship	because	people	blame	the	other	person	or	want	to
change	their	behavior.	How	can	they	live	peacefully	instead?

Answer:	You	just	accept	that	all	relationships	have	their	ups	and	downs.
You	have	to	have	a	sense	of	humor	about	the	human	condition	itself
and	its	seeming	contradictions	and	paradoxes.	You	want	the	other
person	to	be	happy	and	comfortable,	and	you	know	that	you	are	happy
and	comfortable	when	they	are	happy	and	comfortable.	There	is	a
mutual	alignment	with	a	peaceful	lifestyle.	Let	go	of	judging,	blaming,
and	controlling	the	other.	Let	go	of	expecting	them	to	be	different	than
they	are.	We	all	have	our	foibles.	It	can	be	sort	of	fun	to	make	a	list	of
your	own	foibles.	There	can	be	a	decision	not	to	focus	on	negativity	in
one’s	environment	or	a	relationship.	People	can	tolerate	tensions	and
differences	for	variable	periods	of	time,	and	at	different	ages	you	can
tolerate	things	more	or	less.

Question:	What	about	the	negative	emotions	that	come	up	for	parents

when	dealing	with	children?

Answer:	Tolerance	for	children’s	behaviors	varies	depending	on
cultural	context,	gender,	age,	moral	views,	and	other	factors.	You	put
up	with	things	in	kindergarten	that	you	don’t	tolerate	in	third	grade.	It	is
common	for	parents	to	have	to	let	go	of	expectations	of	their	children.
What’s	it	like	for	an	expert	musician	to	have	a	child	with	no	musical
skill	or	inclination?	Expectations	are	subtle	pressures	on	the	other
person,	who	will	then	unconsciously	resist.	In	parenting,	you	want	to
relinquish	expectations	and	personal	favoritisms.	If	you’re	an	expert	at
billiards,	can	you	let	go	of	being	disappointed	that	your	kid	is	lousy	at
shooting	pool?

Another	common	issue	is	over-parenting.	Sometimes	a	parent
confuses	loving	a	grown	child	with	bailing	them	out	of	every	difficulty.
At	a	certain	age,	sometimes	love	means	“tough	love,”	that	is,	letting	the
child	find	his	own	way	out	of	the	mess	he	made	so	that	he	has	the
opportunity	to	discover	his	own	inner	resources.

Question:	If	I	let	go	of	a	lot	of	guilt,	wouldn’t	the	technique	result	in
promiscuity?

Answer:	On	the	contrary,	promiscuity	is	based	on	low	self-esteem,
exploitation,	and	lack	of	love.	The	letting	go	of	negativity	and
selfishness,	concern	for	others,	a	heightened	pleasure	from	their
company,	and	higher	self-esteem	changes	one’s	perspective	of
relationships.	The	capacity	for	lovingness	increases	rapidly.	Much	of
promiscuity	is	an	attempt	to	overcome	unconscious	fears	and	seek
reassurance.	These	can	all	be	let	go	of,	so	that	more	mature
relationships	take	their	place.

Question:	I	have	been	going	to	sex	therapy,	which	is	based	on
behavioral	retraining.	Would	that	be	compatible?

Answer:	There	is	no	incompatibility.	Behavioral	retraining	is	an	attempt
to	replace	negative	programs	with	positive	ones.	Essentially,	it	is
replacing	“I	can’t”	with	“I	can.”	That	is	what	this	technique	of	letting
go	is	all	about.

Question:	Will	the	letting	go	technique	cure	impotence	or	frigidity?

Answer:	It	is	not	a	cure	for	anything;	it	is	a	self-investigative	technique
that	rapidly	opens	up	awareness	of	inner	feelings,	thoughts,	and	beliefs.

Both	frigidity	and	impotency	are	statements	on	the	behavioral	level	of
“I	can’t,”	which	in	the	unconscious	means	“I	won’t.”	They	are	both
resistances	to	joy,	love,	expression,	and	aliveness.	The	most	common
causes	are	repressed	guilt,	fear,	and	anger,	emotions	that	spill	out
through	the	autonomic	nervous	system.	Impotence	and	frigidity	are
expressions	of	conflict.	Most	people	who	use	the	letting	go	technique
report	overall	improvements	in	their	sexual	life	in	a	variety	of	ways,
and	many	have	reported	recovery	from	sexual	inhibitions.	Likewise,
many	have	also	reported	the	relief	from	sexual	excessiveness	and
excessive	preoccupation	with	the	subject.

Question:	How	does	the	mechanism	of	surrender	relate	to	the	process	of
aging?

Answer:	It	facilitates	graceful	aging.	Getting	older	brings	a	big	change
in	your	lifestyle.	Often	there	is	a	decline	in	vision,	hearing,	and
mobility,	which	means	you	are	increasingly	dependent	on	the	care	of
others	for	things	that	you	accomplished	previously	without	a	second
thought.	Old	age	can	be	annoying.	Suddenly,	you	are	incompetent	in
areas	where	you	once	excelled.	As	you	let	go	of	feeling	annoyed,
however,	you	see	that	the	incapacities	of	old	age	serve	a	purpose.	They
get	you	ready	to	leave	the	world.	If	you	were	still	involved	as	a	“star”	in
some	area	of	life,	you’d	resent	leaving	the	world.	You	wouldn’t	be	very
graceful	about	it.	As	you	decline,	it	gives	you	time	to	adjust,	get	used	to
the	fact	that	you’ll	be	leaving,	and	do	any	spiritual	work	that	you	want
to	have	completed	by	the	time	you	leave	here.

When	you	surrender	to	the	process	of	aging	as	simply	part	of	the

human	condition,	you	come	to	peace	with	it.	You	become	more	loving
and	appreciative	of	other	people’s	love	and	care	for	you.	The	more
loving	you	become,	you	see	that	everybody	is	trying	to	be	helpful	to
you.	And	it	is	loving	to	allow	them	to	be	helpful	to	you.	People	think,
“Oh,	I’m	being	selfish	if	I	allow	somebody	to	be	helpful	to	my	life.”
Actually,	it’s	being	generous.	Generosity	is	the	willingness	to	share
your	life	with	others.	It’s	a	gift	to	people	to	allow	them	to	love	you.

The	Mechanism

Question:	How	can	surrendering	be	more	constant?

Answer:	The	secret	to	using	this	mechanism	more	often	and	more
consistently	is,	first	of	all,	the	wish	to	do	so.	That	is	Step	#1.	You	have

to	want	to	be	free	of	the	feeling	more	than	you	want	to	keep	it.
Sometimes	it	is	just	a	matter	of	remembering,	and	you	can	use	some
kind	of	a	cue	card	to	remind	you.

Another	way	is	to	establish	a	routine.	It	is	very	good	to	start	the

day	by	surrendering	your	thoughts	and	feelings	about	your
expectations,	to	picture	the	way	you	would	like	it	to	go,	and	to	let	go	of
all	negative	thoughts	that	would	interfere	with	the	day	going	in	that
way.	Then,	at	the	end	of	the	day,	sit	down	and	surrender	anything	that
came	up	during	the	course	of	the	day	that	you	overlooked	or	didn’t
have	time	to	pay	attention	to.	This	is	called	“cleaning	up,”	and	most
people	find	that	they	sleep	better.

Another	way	is	to	keep	a	notebook	where	you	write	down	your

successes.	You	might	put	down	the	goal	of	constant	surrendering	and
follow	it	up	with	what	the	results	were.

Another	way	is	to	let	go	of	your	resistance	to	surrendering	and,	as
you	start	the	day,	reaffirm	your	intention	to	let	go	of	all	negativity	that
day.	You	also	reaffirm	that	you	are	free	not	to	surrender.	After	all,	it	is
totally	a	matter	of	choice.	Let	go	of	any	feeling	of	compulsion	about	it.
There	isn’t	any	“should.”

Question:	What	do	you	think	is	the	most	frequent	cause	for	our
resistance	to	surrender?

Answer:	We	think	that	somehow,	if	we	hang	on	to	that	feeling,	it	is
going	to	get	us	what	we	want.	If	we	get	stuck	in	a	feeling,	it	is	useful	to
look	at	the	question	of	what	we	think	we	have	accomplished	by	hanging
on	to	it.	We	will	almost	always	find	that	we	have	a	fantasy	that	it	will
have	some	effect	on	some	other	person	and	change	their	behavior	or
attitudes	toward	us.	If	we	let	go	of	that,	we	become	willing	to	let	go	of
the	feeling.

Question:	If	I	surrender	all	the	time,	won’t	I	just	become	passive?

Answer:	On	the	contrary,	surrendering	will	clear	the	decks	for	effective
action.	Passivity	is	often	because	of	inhibition	and	a	failure	to	see
alternate	ways	to	handle	a	situation.	For	instance,	a	person	will	say,	“In
the	conference,	he	got	me	so	mad	I	just	sat	there	and	said	nothing.”
Now	it’s	rather	clear	what	the	problem	is.	The	saying	nothing	was	due
to	the	anger	and	the	person’s	picturing	that	the	only	emotional	response
he	could	make	would	be	anger.	Since	this	would	be	inappropriate	in	a

business	situation,	he	said	nothing.	Had	the	anger	been	let	go,	the
person	could	have	been	confidently	assertive	and	stated	his	opinion
instead	of	clamming	up.

Question:	In	therapy,	I	learned	how	to	express	anger,	and	I	think	it	is	a
very	useful	thing.	Do	I	have	to	give	it	up?

Answer:	If	you	look	at	anger,	you	will	see	that	its	basis	is	almost	always
fear.	We	get	angry	because	we	have	been	threatened.	The	threat	arouses
fear.	The	fear	means	we	feel	that	we	are	unequal	to	the	situation.	Anger
biologically	is	like	swelling	up	to	intimidate	our	opponent.	Anger	is
coming	from	weakness	rather	than	strength.	The	person	who	has
surrendered	is,	therefore,	relying	on	strength	rather	than	weakness.	The
person	who	has	surrendered	does	not	have	to	fall	back	upon	anger	to
handle	a	situation.	Also,	anger	cannot	be	counted	upon.	In	addition,	it
has	many	destructive	effects;	for	example,	it	is	running	you	instead	of
your	running	it.	A	totally	surrendered	person	is	free	to	choose	to
express	anger	if	they	wish,	but	it	is	done	out	of	choice,	not	out	of
necessity.	Anger,	especially	chronic	anger,	has	deleterious	effects	on
the	body	organs,	and	research	in	psychosomatic	medicine	has	indicated
that	repressed	anger	is	associated	with	hypertension,	arthritis,	and	a
variety	of	other	diseases.

Question:	You	mentioned	that	surrender	is	a	natural	psychological
mechanism	of	the	mind.	If	that	is	so,	how	come	we	have	to	learn	how	to
do	it?

Answer:	Although	it	is	true	that	surrender	or	letting	go	is	a	natural
mechanism	of	the	mind,	it	must	be	remembered	that	the	mind	has
multiple	conflicting	motivations.	Whereas	one	part	of	your	mind	would
like	to	be	free	of	the	tension	from	a	feeling,	another	part	of	your	mind	is
programmed	to	believe	that	hanging	on	to	the	feeling	will	somehow
magically	bring	about	some	desired	end.	Unless	one	is	conscious	and
aware	and	has	mastered	the	technique,	the	conflicts	of	the	mind	will
overrule	and	dominate.	Basically,	the	technique	of	letting	go	gives	you
the	power	of	choice	over	the	tendencies	of	mind.	Instead	of	being	at	its
effect,	the	mind	is	now	under	your	mastery.	It	opens	up	freedom	and	the
capacity	for	free	choice.

Question:	I	have	a	hard	time	with	acceptance.	What	do	you

recommend?
Answer:	Divert	your	attention	to	that	which	is	really	essential,
experientially.	Some	days	it	rains;	some	days	it’s	sunny;	some	days	it’s
cloudy.	You	can’t	change	the	rain,	but	you	can	put	on	your	raincoat.
You	can	be	realistic	and	take	the	necessary	steps	to	remain	dry.	There
are	many	aspects	of	life	you	can’t	change,	but	you	can	let	go	of	your
expectation	or	need	that	they	be	different	from	what	they	are.	With
observation,	for	instance,	you	will	notice	that	there	is	always	a	war
going	on	somewhere	in	the	world.	So	to	be	peaceful,	it	is	necessary	to
accept	that	waging	war	is	part	of	human	nature	and	has	been	throughout
all	of	recorded	time.	Mankind	has	been	at	war	97%	of	the	time.

Question:	I	realize	that	fear	and	insecurity	have	driven	me	all	of	my
life,	but	it	seems	like	those	drives	account	for	my	financial	success.	If	I
learn	how	to	surrender,	will	this	adversely	affect	my	income?

Answer:	When	a	lower	motivation	has	been	let	go,	the	mind
automatically	replaces	it	with	a	higher	feeling	and	a	higher	motivation.
What’s	wrong	with	enjoying	earning	a	living	instead	of	being	driven	by
fear?	The	same	activity	will	continue	but	now	from	a	pleasurable	space,
and	it	will	start	bringing	in	many	rewards	other	than	just	financial.

Question:	Without	guilt,	won’t	people	misbehave?

Answer:	Similar	to	a	previous	answer,	loving	concern	for	others
replaces	inhibition	due	to	guilt.	The	more	loving	we	become,	the	more
harmless	we	become	to	others	and	to	society	in	general.	When	you	are
lovingly	concerned	for	the	welfare	of	others,	your	own	welfare	will	be
taken	care	of	and	covered.

Question:	I	have	a	poor	memory.	Do	you	think	I	could	learn	this
technique?

Answer:	There	is	nothing	to	memorize	in	learning	this	technique.	It	is
simply	a	way	of	letting	go.	As	yet,	we	have	not	heard	of	anyone	unable
to	learn	it.

Question:	Sometimes	I	think	I	am	letting	go,	and	sometimes	I’m	not
sure.	I	get	confused.	What	is	the	problem?

Answer:	Look	at	the	resistances	to	the	process	of	surrendering	itself.
Are	there	any	negative	thoughts,	doubts,	or	feelings	about	your	ability

to	do	the	technique?	Let	all	of	these	resistances	come	up,	accept	them,
and	let	them	go.	Clarify	your	intention	to	become	a	happier,	more
loving	and	peaceful	person.

Surrender	to	the	Ultimate

Question:	You’ve	mentioned	“surrender	at	great	depth”	as	a	method	by
which	we	experience	Ultimate	Reality.	Can	you	describe	what	occurs?

Answer:	We	might	call	it	the	“final	run.”	As	you	apply	the	letting	go
technique	to	every	area	of	life,	without	exception,	the	energy	of
spiritual	work	gets	stronger	and	stronger.	There	is	the	fixity	of	attention,
the	relentless	staying	with	a	method,	no	matter	what	is	going	on.

Some	people	say,	“I’ve	done	spiritual	work	off	and	on	for	30	years,

and	I’m	still	where	I	was.”	They’ve	meditated	a	little	there,	prayed	a
little	here,	gone	to	a	workshop,	heard	a	speaker,	read	a	book,	and	it	has
all	been	sporadic.	That’s	all	right.	You	are	busy	in	the	world	and
accumulating	data	that	you	know	you’re	going	to	use	at	a	later	date.

But	then	there	comes	a	time	when	it	means	to	do	whatever	practice
you’re	doing	without	exception,	all	the	time.	The	devotion	to	the	Truth
becomes	overwhelming.	It	isn’t	that	you’re	driving	it.	You’re	being
pulled	by	your	own	destiny;	it	is	by	your	own	karmic	commitment	that
you’ve	chosen	the	ultimate	destiny.	At	that	point,	let’s	say	you	use	the
technique	of	surrender.	This	means	to	surrender	and	let	go	of
everything	at	the	very	moment	it	arises.	It	happens	in	1/10,000th	of	a
second—it’s	coming,	it	peaks,	and	then	it	leaves.	So,	every	feeling,
every	thought,	every	desire,	you	let	go	at	the	peak	of	it.	This	becomes
continuous,	nonstop.

As	mentioned	earlier,	I	remember	letting	go	of	a	severe	attachment
for	11	days,	sitting	and	doing	nothing	but	letting	go	of	this	attachment.
Every	thought,	every	feeling,	every	memory,	everything	about	it—as	it
arose,	it	was	surrendered.	The	grief	that	we	feel	when	we	lose	a
member	of	our	family	is	not	just	about	losing	that	person	here	and	now.
It’s	an	accumulation	of	the	energy	of	all	the	deaths	from	all	the
lifetimes.	This	particular	surrender	was	nonstop	for	11	days,	morning
and	night.	Finally	it	stopped.	Gone	forever.	Never	again	to	be	subject	to
that.

So,	serious	spiritual	work	is	a	continuous	willingness	to	let	things

go	as	they	arise.	It	is	the	willingness	to	surrender	wanting	to	control
everything	as	it	arises,	the	willingness	to	surrender	wanting	to	change	it,

and	to	have	it	our	way.	Very	often	there	will	be	illusions	about	the
nature	of	Reality	that	also	have	to	be	let	go.	That	there’s	a	good	and	a
bad,	a	desirable	and	an	undesirable;	that’s	all	in	the	mind.	In	Reality,
the	sun	shines	and	then	the	clouds	come;	the	rain	falls	and	the	grass
grows	up	and	dies;	the	stock	market	goes	up	and	down;	age	comes	and
goes;	people	arise	and	leave.	And,	so,	there’s	the	ebb	and	flow.	If	you
are	at	this	one	point	of	the	cycle,	there’s	no	use	in	crying	about	it
because	the	cycle	will	cycle	itself	out.	By	surrendering	to	whatever	is
cycling	up,	it	eventually	disappears.	You	disappear	it	by	choosing	to	be
one	with	it	and	refusing	to	want	to	change	it	as	it	arises.	Do	this
continuously,	no	matter	what,	nonstop.

This	means	that	you	cannot	make	an	exception	here,	or	an
exception	there.	It	means	continuously,	and	with	everyone	and
everything.	The	one	or	two	things	you	hide	behind	probably	represent	a
stack.	That’s	why	you’re	hanging	on	to	them.	It’s	not	just	this	annoying
person	you	hate;	they	represent	a	whole	stack	of	that	energy	to	you.
You	can’t	just	skip	over	your	mother-in-law!

Eventually,	everything	is	surrendered	that	stands	in	the	way	of	the

Presence.	The	Presence	is	so	obvious,	so	startling,	so	overwhelming,
that	there’s	no	question	about	it.	It	is	profound,	total,	all-encompassing,
absolutely	overwhelming,	totally	transforming,	and	completely
unmistakable.	When	everything	is	surrendered	that	stands	in	the	way,	It
is	there,	shining	brilliantly	forth.

Instead	of	viewing	this	as	something	in	the	future,	own	it	now.
Enlightenment	is	not	something	that	occurs	in	the	future,	after	50	years
of	sitting	cross-legged	and	saying	“OM.”	It	is	right	here,	in	this	instant.
The	reason	you’re	not	experiencing	this	state	of	total	peace	and
timelessness	is	because	it	is	being	resisted.	It	is	being	resisted	because
you	are	trying	to	control	the	moment.	If	you	let	go	of	trying	to	control
your	experience	of	the	moment,	and	if	you	constantly	surrender	it	like	a
tone	of	music,	then	you	live	on	the	crest	of	this	exact	alwaysness.
Experience	arises	like	a	note	of	music.	The	minute	you	hear	a	note,	it’s
already	passing	away.	The	instant	you’ve	heard	it,	it’s	already
dissolving.	So	every	single	moment	is	dissolving	as	it	arises.	Let	go	of
anticipating	the	next	moment,	trying	to	control	it,	trying	to	hang	on	to
the	moment	that	has	just	passed.	Let	go	clinging	to	what	has	just
occurred.	Let	go	trying	to	control	what	you	think	is	about	to	occur.
Then	you	live	in	an	infinite	space	of	non-time	and	non-event.	There	is
an	infinite	peace	beyond	description.	And	you	are	home.

APPENDIX	A:
THE	MAP	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS®

God-view Life-view

Level

Log Emotion

Process

Self

Is

Enlightenment

All-Being
One
Loving
Wise
Merciful
Inspiring
Enabling
Permitting

Peace
Joy
Love

Perfect
Complete
Benign
Meaningful Reason
Harmonious Acceptance
Hopeful
Willingness
Satisfactory Neutrality
Feasible

Courage

Ineffable

Pure
700-
Consciousness
1000
Illumination
600 Bliss
Transfiguration
540 Serenity
500 Reverence
Revelation
400 Understanding Abstraction
350 Forgiveness
310 Optimism
250 Trust
200 Affirmation

Transcendence
Intention
Release
Empowerment

Indifferent Demanding

Pride

Vengeful

Antagonistic Anger

175 Scorn

150 Hate

Inflation

Aggression

Denying

Disappointing Desire

125 Craving

Enslavement

Punitive

Frightening

Fear

100 Anxiety

Withdrawal

Disdainful Tragic

Grief

75 Regret

Despondency

Condemning Hopeless

Apathy

50 Despair

Abdication

Vindictive Evil

Guilt

30 Blame

Destruction

Despising Miserable

Shame

20 Humiliation

Elimination

APPENDIX	B:
MUSCLE	TESTING	PROCEDURE

General	Information
The	energy	field	of	consciousness	is	infinite	in	dimension.	Specific	levels
correlate	with	human	consciousness	and	have	been	calibrated	from	1	to	1,000.
(see	Appendix	A:	Map	of	Consciousness.)	These	energy	fields	reflect	and
dominate	human	consciousness.

Everything	in	the	universe	radiates	a	specific	frequency	or	minute	energy
field	that	remains	in	the	field	of	consciousness	permanently.	Thus,	every	person
or	being	that	ever	lived	and	anything	about	them,	including	any	event,	thought,
deed,	feeling,	or	attitude,	is	recorded	forever	and	can	be	retrieved	at	any	time	in
the	present	or	the	future.

Technique
The	muscle-testing	response	is	a	simple	“yes”	or	“not	yes”	(no)	response	to	a
specific	stimulus.	It	is	usually	done	by	the	subject	holding	out	an	extended	arm
and	the	tester	pressing	down	on	the	wrist	of	the	extended	arm,	using	two	fingers
and	light	pressure.	Usually	the	subject	holds	a	substance	to	be	tested	over	their
solar	plexus	with	the	other	hand.	The	tester	says	to	the	test	subject,	“Resist,”	and
if	the	substance	being	tested	is	beneficial	to	the	subject,	the	arm	will	be	strong.	If
it	is	not	beneficial	or	it	has	an	adverse	effect,	the	arm	will	go	weak.	The	response
is	very	quick	and	brief.

It	is	important	to	note	that	the	intention,	as	well	as	both	the	tester	and
the	one	being	tested,	must	calibrate	over	200	in	order	to	obtain
accurate	responses.

Experience	from	online	discussion	groups	has	shown	that	many	students
obtain	inaccurate	results.	Further	research	shows	that	at	calibration	200,	there	is
still	a	30	percent	chance	of	error.	The	higher	the	levels	of	consciousness	of	the
test	team,	the	more	accurate	are	the	results.	The	best	attitude	is	one	of	clinical
detachment,	posing	a	statement	with	the	prefix	statement,	“In	the	name	of	the
highest	good,	_____	calibrates	as	true.	Over	100,	Over	200,”	etc.	The

	
contextualization	“in	the	highest	good”	increases	accuracy	because	it	transcends
self-serving	personal	interest	and	motives.

For	many	years,	the	test	was	thought	to	be	a	local	response	of	the	body’s
acupuncture	or	immune	system.	Later	research,	however,	has	revealed	that	the
response	is	not	a	local	response	to	the	body	at	all,	but	instead	is	a	general
response	of	consciousness	itself	to	the	energy	of	a	substance	or	a	statement.	That
which	is	true,	beneficial,	or	pro-life	gives	a	positive	response	that	stems	from	the
impersonal	field	of	consciousness,	which	is	present	in	everyone	living.	This
positive	response	is	indicated	by	the	body’s	musculature	going	strong.	There	is
also	an	associated	pupillary	response	(the	eyes	dilate	with	falsity	and	constrict	to
truth)	as	well	as	alterations	in	brain	function	as	revealed	by	magnetic	imaging.
(For	convenience,	the	deltoid	muscle	is	usually	the	one	best	used	as	an	indicator
muscle;	however,	any	of	the	muscles	of	the	body	can	be	used.)

Before	a	question	(in	the	form	of	a	statement)	is	presented,	it	is	necessary

to	qualify	permission;	that	is,	state,	“I	have	permission	to	ask	about	what	I	am
holding	in	mind”	(Yes/No).	Or,	“This	calibration	serves	the	highest	good.”
If	a	statement	is	false	or	a	substance	is	injurious,	the	muscles	go	weak

quickly	in	response	to	the	command,	“Resist.”	This	indicates	the	stimulus	is
negative,	untrue,	anti-life,	or	the	answer	is	“no.”	The	response	is	fast	and	brief	in
duration.	The	body	will	then	rapidly	recover	and	return	to	normal	muscle
tension.

There	are	three	ways	of	doing	the	testing.	The	one	that	is	used	in	research

and	also	most	generally	used	requires	two	people:	the	tester	and	the	test	subject.
A	quiet	setting	is	preferred,	with	no	background	music.	The	test	subject	closes
their	eyes.	The	tester	must	phrase	the	question	to	be	asked	in	the	form	of	a
statement.	The	statement	can	then	be	answered	as	“yes”	or	“no”	by	the	muscle
response.	For	instance,	the	incorrect	form	would	be	to	ask,	“Is	this	a	healthy
horse?”	The	correct	form	is	to	make	the	statement,	“This	horse	is	healthy,”	or	its
corollary,	“This	horse	is	sick.”

After	making	the	statement,	the	tester	says	“Resist”	to	the	test	subject	who

is	holding	the	extended	arm	parallel	to	the	ground.	The	tester	presses	down
sharply	with	two	fingers	on	the	wrist	of	the	extended	arm	with	mild	force.	The
test	subject’s	arm	will	either	stay	strong,	indicating	a	“yes,”	or	go	weak,
indicating	a	“not	yes”	(no).	The	response	is	short	and	immediate.

A	second	method	is	the	O-ring	method,	which	can	be	done	alone.	The
thumb	and	middle	finger	of	the	same	hand	are	held	tightly	in	an	O	configuration,
and	the	hooked	forefinger	of	the	opposite	hand	is	used	to	try	to	pull	them	apart.
There	is	a	noticeable	difference	in	the	strength	between	a	“yes”	and	a	“no”
response.

The	third	method	is	the	simplest,	yet,	like	the	others,	requires	some	practice.

Simply	lift	a	heavy	object,	such	as	a	large	dictionary	or	merely	a	couple	of
bricks,	from	a	table	about	waist	high.	Hold	in	mind	an	image	or	true	statement	to
be	calibrated	and	then	lift.	Then,	for	contrast,	hold	in	mind	that	which	is	known
to	be	false.	Note	the	ease	of	lifting	when	truth	is	held	in	mind	and	the	greater
effort	necessary	to	lift	the	load	when	the	issue	is	false	(not	true).	The	results	can
be	verified	using	the	other	two	methods.

Calibration	of	Specific	Levels
The	critical	point	between	positive	and	negative,	between	true	and	false,	or
between	that	which	is	constructive	or	destructive,	is	at	the	calibrated	level	of	200
(see	Map	in	Appendix	A).	Anything	above	200,	or	true,	makes	the	subject	go
strong;	anything	below	200,	or	false,	allows	the	arm	to	go	weak.

Anything	past	or	present,	including	images	or	statements,	historical	events,

or	personages,	can	be	tested.	They	need	not	be	verbalized.

Numerical	Calibration
Example:	“Ramana	Maharshi’s	teachings	calibrate	over	700.”	(Y/N).	Or,	“Hitler
calibrated	over	200.”	(Y/N).	“When	he	was	in	his	20s.”	(Y/N).	“His	30s.”	(Y/N).
“His	40s.”	(Y/N).	“At	the	time	of	his	death.”	(Y/N).

Applications
The	muscle	test	cannot	be	used	to	foretell	the	future;	otherwise,	there	are	no
limits	as	to	what	can	be	asked.	Consciousness	has	no	limits	in	time	or	space;
however,	permission	may	be	denied.	All	current	or	historical	events	are	available
for	questioning.	The	answers	are	impersonal	and	do	not	depend	on	the	belief
systems	of	either	the	tester	or	the	test	subject.	For	example,	protoplasm	recoils
from	noxious	stimuli	and	flesh	bleeds.	Those	are	the	qualities	of	these	test
materials	and	are	impersonal.	Consciousness	actually	knows	only	truth	because
only	truth	has	actual	existence.	It	does	not	respond	to	falsehood	because
falsehood	does	not	have	existence	in	Reality.	It	will	also	not	respond	accurately
to	nonintegrous	or	egoistical	questions.

Accurately	speaking,	the	test	response	is	either	an	“on”	response	or	merely	a

“not	on”	response.	Like	the	electrical	switch,	we	say	the	electricity	is	“on,”	and
when	we	use	the	term	“off,”	we	just	mean	that	it	is	not	there.	In	reality,	there	is
no	such	thing	as	off-ness.	This	is	a	subtle	statement	but	crucial	to	the
understanding	of	the	nature	of	consciousness.	Consciousness	is	capable	of
recognizing	only	Truth.	It	merely	fails	to	respond	to	falsehood.	Similarly,	a

mirror	reflects	an	image	only	if	there	is	an	object	to	reflect.	If	no	object	is
present	to	the	mirror,	there	is	no	reflected	image.

To	Calibrate	A	Level
Calibrated	levels	are	relative	to	a	specific	reference	scale.	To	arrive	at	the	same
figures	as	in	the	chart	in	Appendix	A,	reference	must	be	made	to	that	table	or	by
a	statement	such	as,	“On	a	scale	of	human	consciousness	from	1	to	1,000,	where
600	indicates	Enlightenment,	this	_____	calibrates	over	_____	(a	number).”	Or,
“On	a	scale	of	consciousness	where	200	is	the	level	of	Truth	and	500	is	the	level
of	Love,	this	statement	calibrates	over	_____.”	(State	a	specific	number.)

General	Information
People	generally	want	to	determine	truth	from	falsehood.	Therefore,	the
statement	has	to	be	made	very	specifically.	Avoid	using	general	terms	such	as	a
good	job	to	apply	for.	Good	in	what	way?	Pay	scale?	Working	conditions?
Promotional	opportunities?	Fairness	of	the	boss?

Expertise
Familiarity	with	the	test	brings	progressive	expertise.	The	right	questions	to	ask
begin	to	spring	forth	and	can	become	almost	uncannily	accurate.	If	the	same
tester	and	test	subject	work	together	for	a	period	of	time,	one	or	both	of	them
will	develop	what	can	become	an	amazing	accuracy	and	capability	of
pinpointing	just	what	specific	questions	to	ask,	even	though	the	subject	is	totally
unknown	by	either	one.	For	instance,	the	tester	has	lost	an	object	and	begins	by
saying,	“I	left	it	in	my	office.”	(Answer:	No.)	“I	left	it	in	the	car.”	(Answer:	No.)
All	of	a	sudden,	the	test	subject	almost	sees	the	object	and	says,	“Ask,	On	the
back	of	the	bathroom	door.”	The	test	subject	says,	“The	object	is	hanging	on	the
back	of	the	bathroom	door.”	(Answer:	Yes.)	In	this	actual	case,	the	test	subject
did	not	even	know	that	the	tester	had	stopped	for	gas	and	left	a	jacket	in	the
restroom	of	a	gasoline	station.	Any	information	can	be	obtained	about	anything
anywhere	in	current	or	past	time	or	space,	depending	on	receiving	prior
permission.	(Sometimes	one	gets	a	“no,”	perhaps	for	karmic	or	other	unknown
reasons.)	By	cross-checking,	accuracy	can	be	easily	confirmed.	For	anyone	who
learns	the	technique,	more	information	is	available	instantaneously	than	can	be
held	in	all	the	computers	and	libraries	of	the	world.	The	possibilities	are
therefore	obviously	unlimited,	and	the	prospects	breathtaking.

Limitations

The	test	is	accurate	only	if	the	test	subjects	themselves	calibrate	over	200	and	the
intention	for	the	use	of	the	test	is	integrous,	calibrating	over	200.	The
requirement	is	one	of	detached	objectivity	and	alignment	with	truth	rather	than
subjective	opinion.	Thus,	to	try	to	prove	a	point	negates	accuracy.
Approximately	10%	of	the	population	is	not	able	to	use	the	kinesiologic	testing
technique	for	as	yet	unknown	reasons.	Sometimes	married	couples,	for	reasons
as	yet	undiscovered,	are	unable	to	use	each	other	as	test	subjects	and	may	have
to	find	a	third	person	to	be	a	test	partner.

A	suitable	test	subject	is	a	person	whose	arm	goes	strong	when	a	love	object

or	person	is	held	in	mind,	and	it	goes	weak	if	that	which	is	negative	(fear,	hate,
guilt,	etc.)	is	held	in	mind	(e.g.,	Winston	Churchill	makes	one	go	strong,	and
Osama	bin	Laden	makes	one	go	weak).

Occasionally,	a	suitable	test	subject	gives	paradoxical	responses.	This	can
usually	be	cleared	by	doing	the	thymic	thump.	(With	a	closed	fist,	thump	three
times	over	the	upper	breastbone,	smile,	and	say	“ha-ha-ha”	with	each	thump	and
mentally	picture	someone	or	something	that	is	loved.)	The	temporary	imbalance
will	then	clear	up.

The	imbalance	may	be	the	result	of	recently	having	been	with	negative

people,	listening	to	heavy-metal	rock	music,	watching	violent	television
programs,	playing	violent	video	games,	etc.	Negative	music	energy	has	a
deleterious	effect	on	the	energy	system	of	the	body	for	up	to	one-half	hour	after
it	is	turned	off.	Television	commercials	or	background	are	also	a	common	source
of	negative	energy.

As	previously	noted,	this	method	of	discerning	truth	from	falsehood	and	the

calibrated	levels	of	truth	has	strict	requirements.	Because	of	the	limitations,
calibrated	levels	are	supplied	for	ready	reference	in	Truth	vs.	Falsehood.

Explanation
The	muscle-strength	test	is	independent	of	personal	opinion	or	beliefs	and	is	an
impersonal	response	of	the	field	of	consciousness,	just	as	protoplasm	is
impersonal	in	its	responses.	This	can	be	demonstrated	by	the	observation	that	the
test	responses	are	the	same	whether	verbalized	or	held	silently	in	mind.	Thus,	the
test	subject	is	not	influenced	by	the	question	as	they	do	not	even	know	what	it	is.
To	demonstrate	this,	do	the	following	exercise:

The	tester	holds	in	mind	an	image	unknown	to	the	test	subject	and	states,

“The	image	I	am	holding	in	mind	is	positive”	(or	“true,”	or	“calibrates	over
200,”	etc.).	Upon	direction,	the	test	subject	then	resists	the	downward	pressure
on	the	wrist.	If	the	tester	holds	a	positive	image	in	mind	(e.g.,	Abraham	Lincoln,
Jesus,	Mother	Teresa,	etc.),	the	test	subject’s	arm	muscle	will	go	strong.	If	the

tester	holds	a	false	statement	or	negative	image	in	mind	(e.g.,	bin	Laden,	Hitler,
etc.),	the	arm	will	go	weak.	Inasmuch	as	the	test	subject	does	not	know	what	the
tester	has	in	mind,	the	results	are	not	influenced	by	personal	beliefs.

Disqualification
Both	skepticism	(cal.	160)	and	cynicism,	as	well	as	atheism,	calibrate	below	200
because	they	reflect	negative	prejudgment.	In	contrast,	true	inquiry	requires	an
open	mind	and	honesty	devoid	of	intellectual	vanity.	Negative	studies	of	the
testing	methodology	all	calibrate	below	200	(usually	at	160),	as	do	the
investigators	themselves.

That	even	famous	professors	can	and	do	calibrate	below	200	may	seem
surprising	to	the	average	person.	Thus,	negative	studies	are	a	consequence	of
negative	bias.	As	an	example,	Francis	Crick’s	research	design	that	led	to	the
discovery	of	the	double	helix	pattern	of	DNA	calibrated	at	440.	His	last	research
design,	which	was	intended	to	prove	that	consciousness	was	just	a	product	of
neuronal	activity,	calibrated	at	only	135.	(He	was	an	atheist.)

The	failure	of	investigators	who	themselves,	or	by	faulty	research	design,
calibrate	below	200	(usually	at	160),	confirms	the	truth	of	the	very	methodology
they	claim	to	disprove.	They	should	get	negative	results,	and	so	they	do,	which
paradoxically	proves	the	accuracy	of	the	test	to	detect	the	difference	between
unbiased	integrity	and	nonintegrity.

Any	new	discovery	may	upset	the	apple	cart	and	be	viewed	as	a	threat	to	the

status	quo	of	prevailing	belief	systems.	That	consciousness	research	validates
spiritual	Reality	is,	of	course,	going	to	precipitate	resistance,	as	it	is	actually	a
direct	confrontation	to	the	dominion	of	the	narcissistic	core	of	the	ego	itself,
which	is	innately	presumptuous	and	opinionated.

Below	consciousness	level	200,	comprehension	is	limited	by	the	dominance

of	Lower	Mind,	which	is	capable	of	recognizing	facts	but	not	yet	able	to	grasp
what	is	meant	by	the	term	truth	(it	confuses	res	interna	with	res	externa),	and
that	truth	has	physiological	accompaniments	that	are	different	from	falsehood.
Additionally,	truth	is	intuited	as	evidenced	by	the	use	of	voice	analysis,	the	study
of	body	language,	pupillary	response,	EEG	changes	in	the	brain,	fluctuations	in
breathing	and	blood	pressure,	galvanic	skin	response,	dowsing,	and	even	the
Huna	technique	of	measuring	the	distance	that	the	aura	radiates	from	the	body.
Some	people	have	a	very	simple	technique	that	utilizes	the	standing	body	like	a
pendulum	(fall	forward	with	truth	and	backward	with	falsehood).

From	a	more	advanced	contextualization,	the	principles	that	prevail	are	that
Truth	cannot	be	disproved	by	falsehood	any	more	than	light	can	be	disproved	by
darkness.	The	nonlinear	is	not	subject	to	the	limitations	of	the	linear.	Truth	is	a

paradigm	different	from	logic	and	thus	is	not	provable,	as	that	which	is	provable
calibrates	only	in	the	400s.	Consciousness	research	methodology	operates	at
level	600,	which	is	at	the	interface	of	the	linear	and	the	nonlinear	dimensions.

Discrepancies
Differing	calibrations	may	be	obtained	over	time	or	by	different	investigators	for
a	variety	of	reasons:

1.	Situations,	people,	politics,	policies,	and	attitudes	change	over	time.

2.	People	tend	to	use	different	sensory	modalities	when	they	hold	something
in	mind,	i.e.,	visual,	sensory,	auditory,	or	feeling.	Your	mother	could
therefore	be	how	she	looked,	felt,	sounded,	etc.,	or	Henry	Ford	could	be
calibrated	as	a	father,	as	an	industrialist,	for	his	impact	on	America,	his
anti-Semitism,	etc.

3.	Accuracy	increases	with	the	level	of	consciousness.	(The	400s	and	above
are	the	most	accurate.)	One	can	specify	context	and	stick	to	a	prevailing
modality.	The	same	team	using	the	same	technique	will	get	results	that	are
internally	consistent.	Expertise	develops	with	practice.	There	are	some
people,	however,	who	are	incapable	of	a	scientific,	detached	attitude	and
are	unable	to	be	objective,	and	for	whom	the	testing	method	will	therefore
not	be	accurate.	Dedication	and	intention	to	the	truth	has	to	be	given
priority	over	personal	opinions	and	trying	to	prove	them	as	being	“right.”

Note
While	it	was	discovered	that	the	technique	does	not	work	for	people	who
calibrate	at	less	than	level	200,	only	quite	recently	was	it	further	discovered	that
the	technique	does	not	work	if	the	persons	doing	the	testing	are	atheists.	This
may	be	simply	the	consequence	of	the	fact	that	atheism	calibrates	below	level
200,	and	that	negation	of	the	truth	or	Divinity	(omniscience)	karmically
disqualifies	the	negator	just	as	hate	negates	love.

REFERENCES

Anonymous,	A	Course	in	Miracles.	Huntington	Station,	New	York:	Foundation

for	Inner	Peace.	1975.

Backster,	C.,	Primary	Perception.	Anza,	CA:	White	Rose	Millennium.	2003.
Bailey,	A.,	Glamour:	A	World	Problem.	New	York:	Lucis	Publishing.	1950
Bohm,	D.,	Wholeness	and	the	Implicate	Order.	London:	Routledge	&	Kegan

Paul.	1980.

Brain/Mind	Bulletin.	Los	Angeles,	CA:	Interface	Press.	1980–1986.
Briggs,	J.,	and	Peat,	F.D.,	Looking	Glass	Universe.	New	York:	Simon	&

Schuster.	1984.

Briggs,	J.,	Turbulent	Mirror:	An	Illustrated	Guide	to	Chaos	Theory	and	the

Science	of	Wholeness.	New	York:	Harper	&	Row.	1989.

“Cancer	United	to	Helplessness	and	Immune	Suppression,”	Brain/Mind

Bulletin.	June	21,	1982.

Capra,	F.,	The	Tao	of	Physics:	An	Exploration	of	the	Parallels	Between
Modern	Physics	and	Eastern	Mysticism.	New	York:	Bantam.	1976.

Cannon,	W.,	Bodily	Changes	in	Pain,	Hunger,	Fear	and	Rage.	New	York:	D.

Appleton	Co.	1915.

Davidson,	R.,	“Towards	a	Biology	of	Positive	Affect	and	Compassion,”	in

Davidson,	R.,	Harrington,	A.	(Eds.),	Visions	of	Compassion.	New	York:
Oxford	University	Press.	2002.

Deliman,	T.,	Holistic	Medicine,	Harmony	of	Body,	Mind,	and	Spirit.	Reston,

VA:	Reston	Publishers.	1982.

Diamond,	J.,	Behavioral	Kinesiology.	New	York:	Harper	&	Row.	1979.
——,	Your	Body	Doesn’t	Lie.	New	York:	Warner	Books.	1979.
——,	Life	Energy:	Using	the	Meridians	to	Unblock	Hidden	Power	of	Your

Emotions.	New	York:	Paragon	House.	1998.

The	Dhammapada:	The	Sayings	of	the	Buddha.	New	York:	Oxford	University

Press.	1987.

Dumitrescu,	I.,	Kenyon,	J.,	Electrographic	Imaging	in	Medicine	and	Biology.

Sudbury,	Suffolk,	U.K.:	Neville	Spearman	Ltd.	1983.

Eadie,	B.	J.,	Embraced	by	the	Light.	Placerville,	California:	Gold	Leaf	Press.

1992.

“Early	Stress	Style	Linked	to	Later	Illness,”	Brain/Mind	Bulletin.	June	22,

	
1981.

Eccles,	J.,	Evolution	of	the	Brain:	Creation	of	the	Self.	Edinburgh,	Scotland:

Routledge.	1989.

Ferguson,	M.,	The	Aquarian	Conspiracy:	Personal	and	Social	Transformation

in	the	1980s.	New	York:	Tarcher.	1980.

Field,	J.,	A	Life	of	One’s	Own.	New	York:	Tarcher.	[1934],	1981.
Frankl,	V.,	Man’s	Search	for	Meaning.	Boston:	Beacon	Press.	[1959],	2004.
Gray,	W.,	LaViolette,	P.,	“Feelings	Code	and	Organize	Thinking,”	Brain/Mind

Bulletin.	October	5,	1981.

Hawkins,	D.	R.,	Archival	Office	Visit	Series:	“Stress”;	“Health”;	“Illness	and
Self-Healing”;	“Handling	Major	Crises”;	“Depression”;	“Alcoholism”;
“Spiritual	First	Aid”;	“The	Aging	Process”;	“The	Map	of	Consciousness”;
“Death	and	Dying”;	“Pain	and	Suffering”;	“Losing	Weight”;	“Worry,	Fear
and	Anxiety”;	“Drug	Addiction	and	Alcoholism”;	and	“Sexuality.”	Lectures
in	video	and	audio.	Sedona,	Arizona:	Institute	for	Spiritual	Research,	1986.

——,	and	Pauling,	L.,	Orthomolecular	Psychiatry.	San	Francisco:	W.H.

Freeman	and	Company.	1973.

——,	Power	vs.	Force:	Hidden	Determinants	of	Human	Behavior.	Author’s
Official	Revised	Edition.	Sedona,	AZ:	Veritas	Publishing.	[1995]	2012.
“Healer	Affects	Growth	of	Bacterial	Cultures,”	Brain/Mind	Bulletin.	April	18,

1983.

James,	W.,	The	Varieties	of	Religious	Experience.	New	York:	Random	House.

1929.

Jampolsky,	J.,	Love	is	Letting	Go	of	Fear.	25th	Anniversary	Edition.	New	York:

Celestial	Arts.	2004.

Jung,	C.	G.,	Collected	Works.	Princeton,	New	Jersey:	Princeton	University

Press.	1979.

——,	(R.	F.	Hull,	trans.),	Synchronicity	as	a	Causal	Connecting	Principle.
Bollington	Series,	Vol.	20.	Princeton,	New	Jersey:	Princeton	University
Press.	1973.

“Kirlian	Photos	Predict	Cancer,”	Brain/Mind	Bulletin.	May	7,	1984.
Krippner,	S.,	Western	Hemisphere	Conference	on	Kirlian	Photography.

Garden	City,	New	York.	1974.

Kübler-Ross,	E.,	On	Life	after	Death.	New	York:	Celestial	Arts.	1991.
Lamsa,	G.	(trans.),	Holy	Bible	from	Ancient	Eastern	Manuscripts.

Philadelphia:	A.J.	Holmes	Co.	1957.

Liebeskind,	J.,	Shavit,	Y.,	article	on	endorphins	and	cancer	experiment	at

UCLA,	in	Science	(223:188–190).	1980–1984.

Lloyd,	V.,	Choose	Freedom.	Phoenix,	AZ:	Freedom	Publications.	1983.

Luskin,	F.,	Forgive	for	Good.	San	Francisco,	CA:	Harper	One.	2003.
Maharaj,	N.,	I	Am	That,	Vols.	I	and	II.	Bombay,	India:	Cetana.	1973.
Matton,	M.,	Jungian	Psychology	in	Perspective.	New	York:	Free	Press.	1983.
Monroe,	R.,	Journeys	Out	of	the	Body.	Garden	City,	NY:	Doubleday.	1977.
Moody,	R.,	Life	After	Life.	San	Francisco:	Harper	One.	2001.
Moss,	R.,	The	I	That	is	We:	Awakening	to	Higher	Energies	Through

Unconditional	Love.	Millbrae,	CA:	Celestial	Arts.	1981.

“Multiple	Personalities,”	Brain/Mind	Bulletin,	(Vol.	8.,	No.	16).	October	3,

1983.

Neal,	M.,	To	Heaven	and	Back:	The	True	Story	of	a	Doctor’s	Extraordinary

Walk	with	God.	Copyright:	Mary	Neal,	M.D.	2011.

Pace,	T.W.,	Negi,	L.T.,	Adame,	D.D.,	Cole,	S.P.,	Sivilli,	T.I.,	Brown,	T.D.,	Issa,
M.J.,	Raison,	C.L.,	“Effect	of	Compassion	Meditation	on	Neuroendocrine,
Innate	Immune	and	Behavioral	Responses	to	Psychosocial	Stress.”
Psychoneuroendocrinology,	34:	87–98.	2009.

Sapolsky,	R.,	in	Lehrer,	J.,	“Under	Pressure:	The	Search	for	a	Stress	Vaccine,”

Wired	Magazine.	August	2010.

Selye,	H.,	The	Stress	of	Life.	New	York:	McGraw-Hill.	1956.
“Three	Brains	of	Eve:	EEG	Data,”	Science	News,	(Vol.	121.,	No.	22).	May	29,

1982.

Tiller,	W.	Psychoenergetic	Science:	A	Second	Copernican-Scale	Revolution.

Walnut	Creek,	CA:	Pavior	Publishers.	2007.

Wilber,	K.	(ed.),	The	Holographic	Paradigm	and	Other	Paradoxes:	Exploring

the	Leading	Edge	of	Science.	Boston:	Shambhala.	1982.

ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR

Biographical	and	Autobiographical	Notes
Dr.	Hawkins	is	an	internationally	known	spiritual	teacher,	author,	and	speaker	on
the	subject	of	advanced	spiritual	states,	consciousness	research,	and	the
Realization	of	the	Presence	of	God	as	Self.

His	published	works,	as	well	as	recorded	lectures,	have	been	widely
recognized	as	unique	in	that	a	very	advanced	state	of	spiritual	awareness
occurred	in	an	individual	with	a	scientific	and	clinical	background	who	was	later
able	to	verbalize	and	explain	the	unusual	phenomenon	in	a	manner	that	is	clear
and	comprehensible.

The	transition	from	the	normal	ego-state	of	mind	to	its	elimination	by	the
Presence	is	described	in	the	trilogy	Power	vs.	Force	(1995),	which	won	praise
even	from	Mother	Teresa,	The	Eye	of	the	I	(2001),	and	I:	Reality	and
Subjectivity	(2003),	which	have	been	translated	into	the	major	languages	of	the
world.	Truth	vs.	Falsehood:	How	to	Tell	the	Difference	(2005),	Transcending
the	Levels	of	Consciousness	(2006),	Discovery	of	the	Presence	of	God:
Devotional	Nonduality	(2007),	and	Reality,	Spirituality	and	Modern	Man
(2008)	continue	the	exploration	of	the	ego’s	expressions	and	inherent	limitations
and	how	to	transcend	them.

The	trilogy	was	preceded	by	research	on	the	Nature	of	Consciousness	and

published	as	the	doctoral	dissertation,	Qualitative	and	Quantitative	Analysis
and	Calibration	of	the	Levels	of	Human	Consciousness	(1995),	which
correlated	the	seemingly	disparate	domains	of	science	and	spirituality.	This	was
accomplished	by	the	major	discovery	of	a	technique	that,	for	the	first	time	in
human	history,	demonstrated	a	means	to	discern	truth	from	falsehood.

The	importance	of	the	initial	work	was	given	recognition	by	its	very

favorable	and	extensive	review	in	Brain/Mind	Bulletin	and	at	later	presentations
such	as	the	International	Conference	on	Science	and	Consciousness.	Many
presentations	were	given	to	a	variety	of	organizations,	spiritual	conferences,
church	groups,	nuns,	and	monks,	both	nationally	and	in	foreign	countries,
including	the	Oxford	Forum	in	England.	In	the	Far	East,	Dr.	Hawkins	is	a
recognized	“Teacher	of	the	Way	to	Enlightenment”	(“Tae	Ryoung	Sun	Kak
Dosa”).	In	response	to	his	observation	that	much	spiritual	truth	has	been
misunderstood	over	the	ages	due	to	lack	of	explanation,	Dr.	Hawkins	has

	
presented	monthly	seminars	that	provide	detailed	explanations	which	are	too
lengthy	to	describe	in	book	format.	Recordings	are	available	that	end	with
questions	and	answers,	thus	providing	additional	clarification.

The	overall	design	of	this	lifetime	work	is	to	recontextualize	the	human

experience	in	terms	of	the	evolution	of	consciousness	and	to	integrate	a
comprehension	of	both	mind	and	spirit	as	expressions	of	the	innate	Divinity	that
is	the	substrate	and	ongoing	source	of	life	and	Existence.	This	dedication	is
signified	by	the	statement	“Gloria	in	Excelsis	Deo!”	with	which	his	published
works	begin	and	end.

Biographic	Summary
Dr.	Hawkins	has	practiced	psychiatry	since	1952	and	is	a	life	member	of	the
American	Psychiatric	Association	and	numerous	other	professional
organizations.	His	national	television	appearance	schedule	has	included	The
McNeil/Leher	News	Hour,	The	Barbara	Walters	Show,	The	Today	Show,
science	documentaries,	and	many	others.	He	was	also	interviewed	by	Oprah
Winfrey.

Dr.	Hawkins	is	the	author	of	numerous	scientific	and	spiritual	publications,

books,	CDs,	DVDs,	and	lecture	series.	He	co-edited	the	landmark	book,
Orthomolecular	Psychiatry,	with	Nobelist	Linus	Pauling.	Dr.	Hawkins	was	a
consultant	for	many	years	to	Episcopal	and	Catholic	Dioceses,	monastic	orders,
and	other	religious	organizations.

Dr.	Hawkins	has	lectured	widely,	with	appearances	at	the	Oxford	Forum

and	Westminster	Abbey,	the	Universities	of	Argentina,	Notre	Dame,	and
Michigan,	Fordham	University,	and	Harvard	University.	He	gave	the	annual
Landsberg	Lecture	at	the	University	of	California	Medical	School	at	San
Francisco.	He	is	also	a	consultant	to	foreign	governments	on	international
diplomacy	and	was	instrumental	in	resolving	longstanding	conflicts	that	were
major	threats	to	world	peace.

In	recognition	of	his	contributions	to	humanity,	in	1995,	Dr.	Hawkins
became	a	knight	of	the	Sovereign	Order	of	the	Hospitaliers	of	St.	John	of
Jerusalem,	which	was	founded	in	1077.

Autobiographic	Note
While	the	truths	reported	in	this	book	were	scientifically	derived	and	objectively
organized,	like	all	truths,	they	were	first	experienced	personally.	A	lifelong
sequence	of	intense	states	of	awareness	beginning	at	a	young	age	first	inspired
and	then	gave	direction	to	the	process	of	subjective	realization	that	has	finally

taken	form	in	this	series	of	books.

At	age	three,	there	occurred	a	sudden	full	consciousness	of	existence,	a
nonverbal	but	complete	understanding	of	the	meaning	of	“I	Am,”	followed
immediately	by	the	frightening	realization	that	“I”	might	not	have	come	into
existence	at	all.	This	was	an	instant	awakening	from	oblivion	into	a	conscious
awareness,	and	in	that	moment,	the	personal	self	was	born	and	the	duality	of	“Is”
and	“Is	Not”	entered	my	subjective	awareness.

Throughout	childhood	and	early	adolescence,	the	paradox	of	existence	and
the	question	of	the	reality	of	the	self	remained	a	repeated	concern.	The	personal
self	would	sometimes	begin	slipping	back	into	a	greater	impersonal	Self,	and	the
initial	fear	of	non-existence—the	fundamental	fear	of	nothingness—would	recur.

In	1939,	as	a	paperboy	with	a	seventeen-mile	bicycle	route	in	rural

Wisconsin,	on	a	dark	winter’s	night	I	was	caught	miles	from	home	in	a	twenty-
below-zero	blizzard.	The	bicycle	fell	over	on	the	ice	and	the	fierce	wind	ripped
the	newspapers	out	of	the	handlebar	basket,	blowing	them	across	the	ice-
covered,	snowy	field.	There	were	tears	of	frustration	and	exhaustion	and	my
clothes	were	frozen	stiff.	To	get	out	of	the	wind,	I	broke	through	the	icy	crust	of
a	high	snow	bank,	dug	out	a	space,	and	crawled	into	it.	Soon	the	shivering
stopped	and	there	was	a	delicious	warmth,	and	then	a	state	of	peace	beyond	all
description.	This	was	accompanied	by	a	suffusion	of	light	and	a	presence	of
infinite	love	that	had	no	beginning	and	no	end	and	was	undifferentiated	from	my
own	essence.	The	physical	body	and	surroundings	faded	as	my	awareness	was
fused	with	this	all-present,	illuminated	state.	The	mind	grew	silent;	all	thought
stopped.	An	infinite	Presence	was	all	that	was	or	could	be,	beyond	all	time	or
description.

After	that	timelessness,	there	was	suddenly	an	awareness	of	someone
shaking	my	knee;	then	my	father’s	anxious	face	appeared.	There	was	great
reluctance	to	return	to	the	body	and	all	that	that	entailed,	but	because	of	my
father’s	love	and	anguish,	the	Spirit	nurtured	and	reactivated	the	body.	There
was	compassion	for	his	fear	of	death,	although,	at	the	same	time,	the	concept	of
death	seemed	absurd.

This	subjective	experience	was	not	discussed	with	anyone	since	there	was

no	context	available	from	which	to	describe	it.	It	was	not	common	to	hear	of
spiritual	experiences	other	than	those	reported	in	the	lives	of	the	saints.	But	after
this	experience,	the	accepted	reality	of	the	world	began	to	seem	only	provisional;
traditional	religious	teachings	lost	significance	and,	paradoxically,	I	became	an
agnostic.	Compared	to	the	light	of	Divinity	that	had	illuminated	all	existence,	the
god	of	traditional	religion	shone	dully	indeed;	thus	spirituality	replaced	religion.
During	World	War	II,	hazardous	duty	on	a	minesweeper	often	brought	close

brushes	with	death,	but	there	was	no	fear	of	it.	It	was	as	though	death	had	lost	its
authenticity.	After	the	war,	fascinated	by	the	complexities	of	the	mind	and
wanting	to	study	psychiatry,	I	worked	my	way	through	medical	school.	My
training	psychoanalyst,	a	professor	at	Columbia	University,	was	also	an
agnostic;	we	both	took	a	dim	view	of	religion.	The	analysis	went	well,	as	did	my
career,	and	success	followed.

I	did	not,	however,	settle	quietly	into	professional	life.	I	fell	ill	with	a
progressive,	fatal	illness	that	did	not	respond	to	any	treatments	available.	By	age
38,	I	was	in	extremis	and	knew	I	was	about	to	die.	I	didn’t	care	about	the	body,
but	my	spirit	was	in	a	state	of	extreme	anguish	and	despair.	As	the	final	moment
approached,	the	thought	flashed	through	my	mind,	“What	if	there	is	a	God?”	So
I	called	out	in	prayer,	“If	there	is	a	God,	I	ask	him	to	help	me	now.”	I
surrendered	to	whatever	God	there	might	be	and	went	into	oblivion.	When	I
awoke,	a	transformation	of	such	enormity	had	taken	place	that	I	was	struck
dumb	with	awe.

The	person	I	had	been	no	longer	existed.	There	was	no	personal	self	or	ego,

only	an	Infinite	Presence	of	such	unlimited	power	that	it	was	all	that	was.	This
Presence	had	replaced	what	had	been	“me,”	and	the	body	and	its	actions	were
controlled	solely	by	the	Infinite	Will	of	the	Presence.	The	world	was	illuminated
by	the	clarity	of	an	Infinite	Oneness	that	expressed	itself	as	all	things	revealed	in
their	infinite	beauty	and	perfection.

As	life	went	on,	this	stillness	persisted.	There	was	no	personal	will;	the

physical	body	went	about	its	business	under	the	direction	of	the	infinitely
powerful	but	exquisitely	gentle	Will	of	the	Presence.	In	that	state,	there	was	no
need	to	think	about	anything.	All	truth	was	self-evident	and	no	conceptualization
was	necessary	or	even	possible.	At	the	same	time,	the	physical	nervous	system
felt	extremely	overtaxed,	as	though	it	were	carrying	far	more	energy	than	its
circuits	had	been	designed	for.

It	was	not	possible	to	function	effectively	in	the	world.	All	ordinary

motivations	had	disappeared,	along	with	all	fear	and	anxiety.	There	was	nothing
to	seek,	as	all	was	perfect.	Fame,	success,	and	money	were	meaningless.	Friends
urged	the	pragmatic	return	to	clinical	practice,	but	there	was	no	ordinary
motivation	to	do	so.

There	was	now	the	ability	to	perceive	the	reality	that	underlay	personalities:

the	origin	of	emotional	sickness	lay	in	people’s	belief	that	they	were	their
personalities.	And	so,	as	though	of	its	own,	a	clinical	practice	resumed	and
eventually	became	huge.	People	came	from	all	over	the	United	States.	The
practice	had	two	thousand	outpatients,	which	required	more	than	fifty	therapists
and	other	employees,	a	suite	of	twenty-five	offices,	and	research	and

electroencephalic	laboratories.	There	were	a	thousand	new	patients	a	year.	In
addition,	there	were	appearances	on	radio	and	network	television	shows,	as
previously	mentioned.	In	1973,	the	clinical	research	was	documented	in	a
traditional	format	in	the	book,	Orthomolecular	Psychiatry.	This	work	was	ten
years	ahead	of	its	time	and	created	something	of	a	stir.

The	overall	condition	of	the	nervous	system	improved	slowly,	and	then
another	phenomenon	commenced.	There	was	a	sweet,	delicious	band	of	energy
continuously	flowing	up	the	spine	and	into	the	brain	where	it	created	an	intense
sensation	of	continuous	pleasure.	Everything	in	life	happened	by	synchronicity,
evolving	in	perfect	harmony;	the	miraculous	was	commonplace.	The	origin	of
what	the	world	would	call	miracles	was	the	Presence,	not	the	personal	self.	What
remained	of	the	personal	“me”	was	only	a	witness	to	these	phenomena.	The
greater	“I,”	deeper	than	my	former	self	or	thoughts,	determined	all	that
happened.

The	states	that	were	present	had	been	reported	by	others	throughout	history
and	led	to	the	investigation	of	spiritual	teachings,	including	those	of	the	Buddha,
enlightened	sages,	Huang	Po,	and	more	recent	teachers	such	as	Ramana
Maharshi	and	Nisargadatta	Maharaj.	It	was	thus	confirmed	that	these
experiences	were	not	unique.	The	Bhagavad-Gita	now	made	complete	sense.	At
times,	the	same	spiritual	ecstasy	reported	by	Sri	Ramakrishna	and	the	Christian
saints	occurred.

Everything	and	everyone	in	the	world	was	luminous	and	exquisitely
beautiful.	All	living	beings	became	Radiant	and	expressed	this	Radiance	in
stillness	and	splendor.	It	was	apparent	that	all	mankind	is	actually	motivated	by
inner	love	but	has	simply	become	unaware;	most	lives	are	lived	as	though	by
sleepers	unawakened	to	the	awareness	of	who	they	really	are.	People	around	me
looked	as	though	they	were	asleep	and	were	incredibly	beautiful.	It	was	like
being	in	love	with	everyone.

It	was	necessary	to	stop	the	habitual	practice	of	meditating	for	an	hour	in	the
morning	and	then	again	before	dinner	because	it	would	intensify	the	bliss	to	such
an	extent	that	it	was	not	possible	to	function.	An	experience	similar	to	the	one
that	had	occurred	in	the	snow	bank	as	a	boy	would	recur,	and	it	became
increasingly	difficult	to	leave	that	state	and	return	to	the	world.	The	incredible
beauty	of	all	things	shone	forth	in	all	their	perfection,	and	where	the	world	saw
ugliness,	there	was	only	timeless	beauty.	This	spiritual	love	suffused	all
perception,	and	all	boundaries	between	here	and	there,	or	then	and	now,	or
separation	disappeared.

During	the	years	spent	in	inner	silence,	the	strength	of	the	Presence	grew.

Life	was	no	longer	personal;	a	personal	will	no	longer	existed.	The	personal	“I”

had	become	an	instrument	of	the	Infinite	Presence	and	went	about	and	did	as	it
was	willed.	People	felt	an	extraordinary	peace	in	the	aura	of	that	Presence.
Seekers	sought	answers	but	as	there	was	no	longer	any	such	individual	as	David,
they	were	actually	finessing	answers	from	their	own	Self,	which	was	not
different	from	mine.	From	each	person	the	same	Self	shone	forth	from	their
eyes.

The	miraculous	happened,	beyond	ordinary	comprehension.	Many	chronic

maladies	from	which	the	body	had	suffered	for	years	disappeared;	eyesight
spontaneously	normalized,	and	there	was	no	longer	a	need	for	the	lifetime
bifocals.

Occasionally,	an	exquisitely	blissful	energy,	an	Infinite	Love,	would
suddenly	begin	to	radiate	from	the	heart	toward	the	scene	of	some	calamity.
Once,	while	driving	on	a	highway,	this	exquisite	energy	began	to	beam	out	of
the	chest.	As	the	car	rounded	a	bend,	there	was	an	auto	accident;	the	wheels	of
the	overturned	car	were	still	spinning.	The	energy	passed	with	great	intensity
into	the	occupants	of	the	car	and	then	stopped	of	its	own	accord.	Another	time,
while	I	was	walking	on	the	streets	of	a	strange	city,	the	energy	started	to	flow
down	the	block	ahead	and	arrived	at	the	scene	of	an	incipient	gang	fight.	The
combatants	fell	back	and	began	to	laugh,	and	again,	the	energy	stopped.

Profound	changes	of	perception	came	without	warning	in	improbable
circumstances.	While	dining	alone	at	Rothmann’s	on	Long	Island,	the	Presence
suddenly	intensified	until	every	thing	and	every	person,	which	had	appeared	as
separate	in	ordinary	perception,	melted	into	a	timeless	universality	and	oneness.
In	the	motionless	Silence,	it	became	obvious	that	there	are	no	“events”	or
“things”	and	that	nothing	actually	“happens”	because	past,	present,	and	future
are	merely	artifacts	of	perception,	as	is	the	illusion	of	a	separate	“I”	being
subject	to	birth	and	death.	As	the	limited,	false	self	dissolved	into	the	universal
Self	of	its	true	origin,	there	was	an	ineffable	sense	of	having	returned	home	to	a
state	of	absolute	peace	and	relief	from	all	suffering.	It	is	only	the	illusion	of
individuality	that	is	the	origin	of	all	suffering.	When	one	realizes	that	one	is	the
universe,	complete	and	at	one	with	All	That	Is,	forever	without	end,	then	no
further	suffering	is	possible.

Patients	came	from	every	country	in	the	world,	and	some	were	the	most

hopeless	of	the	hopeless.	Grotesque,	writhing,	wrapped	in	wet	sheets	for
transport	from	far-away	hospitals	they	came,	hoping	for	treatment	for	advanced
psychoses	and	grave,	incurable	mental	disorders.	Some	were	catatonic;	many
had	been	mute	for	years.	But	in	each	patient,	beneath	the	crippled	appearance,
there	was	the	shining	essence	of	love	and	beauty,	perhaps	so	obscured	to
ordinary	vision	that	he	or	she	had	become	totally	unloved	in	this	world.

One	day	a	mute	catatonic	was	brought	into	the	hospital	in	a	straitjacket.	She

had	a	severe	neurological	disorder	and	was	unable	to	stand.	Squirming	on	the
floor,	she	went	into	spasms	and	her	eyes	rolled	back	in	her	head.	Her	hair	was
matted;	she	had	torn	all	her	clothes	and	uttered	guttural	sounds.	Her	family	was
fairly	wealthy;	as	a	result,	over	the	years	she	had	been	seen	by	innumerable
physicians	and	famous	specialists	from	all	over	the	world.	Every	treatment	had
been	tried	on	her	and	she	had	been	given	up	as	hopeless	by	the	medical
profession.

A	short,	nonverbal	question	arose:	“What	do	you	want	done	with	her,	God?”

Then	came	the	realization	that	she	just	needed	to	be	loved,	that	was	all.	Her
inner	self	shone	through	her	eyes	and	the	Self	connected	with	that	loving
essence.	In	that	second,	she	was	healed	by	her	own	recognition	of	who	she	really
was;	what	happened	to	her	mind	or	body	did	not	matter	to	her	any	longer.

This,	in	essence,	occurred	with	countless	patients.	Some	recovered	in	the
eyes	of	the	world	and	some	did	not,	but	whether	a	clinical	recovery	ensued	did
not	matter	any	longer	to	the	patients.	Their	inner	agony	was	over.	As	they	felt
loved	and	at	peace	within,	their	pain	stopped.	This	phenomenon	can	only	be
explained	by	saying	that	the	Compassion	of	the	Presence	recontextualized	each
patient’s	reality	so	that	he	or	she	experienced	healing	on	a	level	that	transcended
the	world	and	its	appearances.	The	inner	peace	of	the	Self	encompassed	us
beyond	time	and	identity.

It	was	clear	that	all	pain	and	suffering	arises	solely	from	the	ego	and	not
from	God.	This	truth	was	silently	communicated	to	the	minds	of	the	patients.
This	was	the	mental	block	in	another	mute	catatonic	who	had	not	spoken	in
many	years.	The	Self	said	to	him	through	mind,	“You’re	blaming	God	for	what
your	ego	has	done	to	you.”	He	jumped	off	the	floor	and	began	to	speak,	much	to
the	shock	of	the	nurse	who	witnessed	the	incident.

The	work	became	increasingly	taxing	and	eventually	overwhelming.
Patients	were	backed	up,	waiting	for	beds	to	open,	although	the	hospital	had
built	an	extra	ward	to	house	them.	There	was	an	enormous	frustration	in	that	the
human	suffering	could	be	countered	in	only	one	patient	at	a	time.	It	was	like
bailing	out	the	sea.	It	seemed	that	there	must	be	some	other	way	to	address	the
causes	of	the	common	malaise,	the	endless	stream	of	spiritual	distress	and
human	suffering.

This	led	to	the	study	of	the	physiological	response	(muscle	testing)	to
various	stimuli,	which	revealed	an	amazing	discovery.	It	was	the	“wormhole”
between	two	universes—the	physical	world	and	the	world	of	the	mind	and	spirit
—an	interface	between	dimensions.	In	a	world	full	of	sleepers	lost	from	their
source,	here	was	a	tool	to	recover,	and	demonstrate	for	all	to	see,	that	lost

connection	with	the	higher	reality.	This	led	to	the	testing	of	every	substance,
thought,	and	concept	that	could	be	brought	to	mind.	The	endeavor	was	aided	by
my	students	and	research	assistants.	Then	a	major	discovery	was	made:	whereas
all	subjects	went	weak	from	negative	stimuli,	such	as	fluorescent	lights,
pesticides,	and	artificial	sweeteners,	students	of	spiritual	disciplines	who	had
advanced	their	levels	of	awareness	did	not	go	weak	as	did	ordinary	people.
Something	important	and	decisive	had	shifted	in	their	consciousness.	It
apparently	occurred	as	they	realized	they	were	not	at	the	mercy	of	the	world	but
rather	affected	only	by	what	their	minds	believed.	Perhaps	the	very	process	of
progress	toward	enlightenment	could	be	shown	to	increase	man’s	ability	to	resist
the	vicissitudes	of	existence,	including	illness.

The	Self	had	the	capacity	to	change	things	in	the	world	by	merely

envisioning	them;	Love	changed	the	world	each	time	it	replaced	non-love.	The
entire	scheme	of	civilization	could	be	profoundly	altered	by	focusing	this	power
of	love	at	a	very	specific	point.	Whenever	this	happened,	history	bifurcated
down	new	roads.

It	now	appeared	that	these	crucial	insights	could	not	only	be	communicated
with	the	world	but	also	visibly	and	irrefutably	demonstrated.	It	seemed	that	the
great	tragedy	of	human	life	had	always	been	that	the	psyche	is	so	easily
deceived;	discord	and	strife	have	been	the	inevitable	consequence	of	mankind’s
inability	to	distinguish	the	false	from	the	true.	But	here	was	an	answer	to	this
fundamental	dilemma,	a	way	to	recontextualize	the	nature	of	consciousness	itself
and	make	explicable	that	which	otherwise	could	only	be	inferred.

It	was	time	to	leave	life	in	New	York,	with	its	city	apartment	and	home	on
Long	Island,	for	something	more	important.	It	was	necessary	to	perfect	myself	as
an	instrument.	This	necessitated	leaving	that	world	and	everything	in	it,
replacing	it	with	a	reclusive	life	in	a	small	town	where	the	next	seven	years	were
spent	in	meditation	and	study.

Overpowering	states	of	bliss	returned	unsought,	and	eventually,	there	was
the	need	to	learn	how	to	be	in	the	Divine	Presence	and	still	function	in	the	world.
The	mind	had	lost	track	of	what	was	happening	in	the	world	at	large.	In	order	to
do	research	and	writing,	it	was	necessary	to	stop	all	spiritual	practice	and	focus
on	the	world	of	form.	Reading	the	newspaper	and	watching	television	helped	to
catch	up	on	the	story	of	who	was	who,	the	major	events,	and	the	nature	of	the
current	social	dialogue.

Exceptional	subjective	experiences	of	truth,	which	are	the	province	of	the

mystic	who	affects	all	mankind	by	sending	forth	spiritual	energy	into	the
collective	consciousness,	are	not	understandable	by	the	majority	of	mankind	and
are	therefore	of	limited	meaning	except	to	other	spiritual	seekers.	This	led	to	an

effort	to	be	ordinary,	because	just	being	ordinary	in	itself	is	an	expression	of
Divinity;	the	truth	of	one’s	real	self	can	be	discovered	through	the	pathway	of
everyday	life.	To	live	with	care	and	kindness	is	all	that	is	necessary.	The	rest
reveals	itself	in	due	time.	The	commonplace	and	God	are	not	distinct.

And	so,	after	a	long	circular	journey	of	the	spirit,	there	was	a	return	to	the

most	important	work,	which	was	to	try	to	bring	the	Presence	at	least	a	little
closer	to	the	grasp	of	as	many	fellow	beings	as	possible.

The	Presence	is	silent	and	conveys	a	state	of	peace	that	is	the	space	in	which

and	by	which	all	is	and	has	its	existence	and	experience.	It	is	infinitely	gentle
and	yet	like	a	rock.	With	it,	all	fear	disappears.	Spiritual	joy	occurs	on	a	quiet
level	of	inexplicable	ecstasy.	Because	the	experience	of	time	stops,	there	is	no
apprehension	or	regret,	no	pain	or	anticipation;	the	source	of	joy	is	unending	and
ever-present.	With	no	beginning	or	ending,	there	is	no	loss	or	grief	or	desire.
Nothing	needs	to	be	done;	everything	is	already	perfect	and	complete.

When	time	stops,	all	problems	disappear;	they	are	merely	artifacts	of	a	point
of	perception.	As	the	Presence	prevails,	there	is	no	further	identification	with	the
body	or	the	mind.	When	the	mind	grows	silent,	the	thought	“I	Am”	also
disappears,	and	Pure	Awareness	shines	forth	to	illuminate	what	one	is,	was,	and
always	will	be,	beyond	all	worlds	and	all	universes,	beyond	time,	and	therefore
without	beginning	or	end.

People	wonder,	“How	does	one	reach	this	state	of	awareness,”	but	few
follow	the	steps	because	they	are	so	simple.	First,	the	desire	to	reach	that	state
was	intense.	Then	began	the	discipline	to	act	with	constant	and	universal
forgiveness	and	gentleness,	without	exception.	One	has	to	be	compassionate
towards	everything,	including	one’s	own	self	and	thoughts.	Next	came	a
willingness	to	hold	desires	in	abeyance	and	surrender	personal	will	at	every
moment.	As	each	thought,	feeling,	desire,	or	deed	was	surrendered	to	God,	the
mind	became	progressively	silent.	At	first,	it	released	whole	stories	and
paragraphs,	then	ideas	and	concepts.	As	one	lets	go	of	wanting	to	own	these
thoughts,	they	no	longer	reach	such	elaboration	and	begin	to	fragment	while
only	half	formed.	Finally,	it	was	possible	to	turn	over	the	energy	behind	thought
itself	before	it	even	became	thought.

The	task	of	constant	and	unrelenting	fixity	of	focus,	allowing	not	even	a

moment	of	distraction	from	meditation,	continued	while	doing	ordinary
activities.	At	first,	this	seemed	very	difficult,	but	as	time	went	on,	it	became
habitual,	automatic,	requiring	less	and	less	effort,	and	finally,	it	was	effortless.
The	process	is	like	a	rocket	leaving	the	earth.	At	first,	it	requires	enormous
power,	then	less	and	less	as	it	leaves	the	earth’s	gravitational	field,	and	finally,	it
moves	through	space	under	its	own	momentum.

Suddenly,	without	warning,	a	shift	in	awareness	occurred	and	the	Presence

was	there,	unmistakable	and	all	encompassing.	There	were	a	few	moments	of
apprehension	as	the	self	died,	and	then	the	absoluteness	of	the	Presence	inspired
a	flash	of	awe.	This	breakthrough	was	spectacular,	more	intense	than	anything
before.	It	has	no	counterpart	in	ordinary	experience.	The	profound	shock	was
cushioned	by	the	love	that	is	with	the	Presence.	Without	the	support	and
protection	of	that	love,	one	would	be	annihilated.

There	followed	a	moment	of	terror	as	the	ego	clung	to	its	existence,	fearing

it	would	become	nothingness.	Instead,	as	it	died,	it	was	replaced	by	the	Self	as
Everythingness,	the	All	in	which	everything	is	known	and	obvious	in	its	perfect
expression	of	its	own	essence.	With	nonlocality	came	the	awareness	that	one	is
all	that	ever	was	or	can	be.	One	is	total	and	complete,	beyond	all	identities,
beyond	all	gender,	beyond	even	humanness	itself.	One	need	never	again	fear
suffering	and	death.	What	happens	to	the	body	from	this	point	is	immaterial.	At
certain	levels	of	spiritual	awareness,	ailments	of	the	body	heal	or	spontaneously
disappear.	But	in	the	absolute	state,	such	considerations	are	irrelevant.	The	body
will	run	its	predicted	course	and	then	return	from	whence	it	came.	It	is	a	matter
of	no	importance;	one	is	unaffected.	The	body	appears	as	an	“it”	rather	than	as	a
“me,”	as	another	object,	like	the	furniture	in	a	room.	It	may	seem	comical	that
people	still	address	the	body	as	though	it	were	the	individual	“you,”	but	there	is
no	way	to	explain	this	state	of	awareness	to	the	unaware.	It	is	best	to	just	go	on
about	one’s	business	and	allow	Providence	to	handle	the	social	adjustments.
However,	as	one	reaches	bliss,	it	is	very	difficult	to	conceal	that	state	of	intense
ecstasy.	The	world	may	be	dazzled,	and	people	may	come	from	far	and	wide	to
be	in	the	accompanying	aura.	Spiritual	seekers	and	the	spiritually	curious	may	be
attracted,	as	may	be	the	very	ill	who	are	seeking	miracles.	One	may	become	a
magnet	and	a	source	of	joy	to	them.	Commonly,	there	is	a	desire	at	this	point	to
share	this	state	with	others	and	to	use	it	for	the	benefit	of	all.

The	ecstasy	that	accompanies	this	condition	is	not	initially	absolutely	stable;

there	are	also	moments	of	great	agony.	The	most	intense	occur	when	the	state
fluctuates	and	suddenly	ceases	for	no	apparent	reason.	These	times	bring	on
periods	of	intense	despair	and	a	fear	that	one	has	been	forsaken	by	the	Presence.
These	falls	make	the	path	arduous,	and	to	surmount	these	reversals	requires	great
will.	It	finally	becomes	obvious	that	one	must	transcend	this	level	or	constantly
suffer	excruciating	“descents	from	grace.”	The	glory	of	ecstasy,	then,	has	to	be
relinquished	as	one	enters	upon	the	arduous	task	of	transcending	duality	until
one	is	beyond	all	opposites	and	their	conflicting	pulls.	But	while	it	is	one	thing
to	happily	give	up	the	iron	chains	of	the	ego,	it	is	quite	another	to	abandon	the
golden	chains	of	ecstatic	joy.	It	feels	as	though	one	is	giving	up	God,	and	a	new

level	of	fear	arises,	never	before	anticipated.	This	is	the	final	terror	of	absolute
aloneness.

To	the	ego,	the	fear	of	nonexistence	was	formidable,	and	it	drew	back	from
it	repeatedly	as	it	seemed	to	approach.	The	purpose	of	the	agonies	and	the	dark
nights	of	the	soul	then	became	apparent.	They	are	so	intolerable	that	their
exquisite	pain	spurs	one	on	to	the	extreme	effort	required	to	surmount	them.
When	vacillation	between	heaven	and	hell	becomes	unendurable,	the	desire	for
existence	itself	has	to	be	surrendered.	Only	once	this	is	done	may	one	finally
move	beyond	the	duality	of	Allness	versus	nothingness,	beyond	existence	versus
nonexistence.	This	culmination	of	the	inner	work	is	the	most	difficult	phase,	the
ultimate	watershed,	where	one	is	starkly	aware	that	the	illusion	of	existence	one
transcends	is	irrevocable.	There	is	no	returning	from	this	step,	and	this	specter	of
irreversibility	makes	this	last	barrier	appear	to	be	the	most	formidable	choice	of
all.

But,	in	fact,	in	this	final	apocalypse	of	the	self,	the	dissolution	of	the	sole
remaining	duality	of	existence	versus	nonexistence—identity	itself—dissolves	in
Universal	Divinity,	and	no	individual	consciousness	is	left	to	choose.	The	last
step,	then,	is	taken	by	God.

—David	R.	Hawkins

Hay	House	Titles	of	Related	Interest

YOU	CAN	HEAL	YOUR	LIFE,	the	movie,
starring	Louise	L.	Hay	&	Friends
(available	as	a	1-DVD	program	and	an	expanded	2-DVD	set)
Watch	the	trailer	at:	www.LouiseHayMovie.com

THE	SHIFT,	the	movie,
starring	Dr.	Wayne	W.	Dyer
(available	as	a	1-DVD	program	and	an	expanded	2-DVD	set)
Watch	the	trailer	at:	www.DyerMovie.com

BEYOND	HAPPINESS:	Finding	and	Fulfilling	Your	Deepest	Desire,	by	Dr.	Frank	J.	Kinslow

CHOICES	AND	ILLUSIONS:	How	Did	I	Get	Where	I	Am,	and	How	Do	I	Get	Where	I	Want	to	Be?,	by
Eldon	Taylor

THE	HONEYMOON	EFFECT:	The	Science	of	Creating	Heaven	on	Earth,	by	Bruce	H.	Lipton,	Ph.D.

MIND	OVER	MEDICINE:	Scientific	Proof	That	You	Can	Heal	Yourself,	by	Lissa	Rankin,	M.D.

THE	TAPPING	SOLUTION:	A	Revolutionary	System	for	Stress-Free	Living,	by	Nick	Ortner

All	of	the	above	are	available	at	your	local	bookstore,	or	may	be	ordered	by	contacting	Hay	House	(see	next
page).

We	hope	you	enjoyed	this	Hay	House	book.	If	you’d	like	to	receive	our	online	catalog	featuring	additional
information	on	Hay	House	books	and	products,	or	if	you’d	like	to	find	out	more	about	the	Hay	Foundation,
please	contact:

Hay	House,	Inc.,	P.O.	Box	5100,	Carlsbad,	CA	92018-5100

(760)	431-7695	or	(800)	654-5126
(760)	431-6948	(fax)	or	(800)	650-5115	(fax)
www.hayhouse.com®	•	www.hayfoundation.org

Published	and	distributed	in	Australia	by:
Hay	House	Australia	Pty.	Ltd.,	18/36	Ralph	St.,	Alexandria	NSW	2015	Phone:	612-9669-4299	•	Fax:	612-
9669-4144	•	www.hayhouse.com.au

Published	and	distributed	in	the	United	Kingdom	by:
Hay	House	UK,	Ltd.,	Astley	House,	33	Notting	Hill	Gate,	London	W11	3JQ	•	Phone:	44-20-3675-2450	•
Fax:	44-20-3675-2451	•	www.hayhouse.co.uk

Published	and	distributed	in	the	Republic	of	South	Africa	by:
Hay	House	SA	(Pty),	Ltd.,	P.O.	Box	990,	Witkoppen	2068	Phone/Fax:	27-11-467-8904	•
www.hayhouse.co.za

Published	in	India	by:	Hay	House	Publishers	India,
Muskaan	Complex,	Plot	No.	3,	B-2,	Vasant	Kunj,	New	Delhi	110	070	Phone:	91-11-4176-1620	•	Fax:	91-
11-4176-1630	•	www.hayhouse.co.in

Distributed	in	Canada	by:
Raincoast,	9050	Shaughnessy	St.,	Vancouver,	B.C.	V6P	6E5	Phone:	(604)	323-7100	•	Fax:	(604)	323-
2600	•	www.raincoast.com

Take	Your	Soul	on	a	Vacation

Visit	www.HealYourLife.com®	to	regroup,	recharge,	and	reconnect	with	your	own	magnificence.
Featuring	blogs,	mind-body-spirit	news,	and	life-changing	wisdom	from	Louise	Hay	and	friends.

Visit	www.HealYourLife.com	today!

Free	e-Newsletters
from	Hay	House,	the	Ultimate
Resource	for	Inspiration

Be	the	first	to	know	about	Hay	House’s	dollar	deals,	free	downloads,	special	offers,	affirmation	cards,
giveaways,	contests	and	more!

Get	exclusive	excerpts	from	our	latest	releases	and	videos	from	Hay	House	Present
Moments.
Enjoy	uplifting	personal	stories,	how-to	articles	and	healing	advice	along	with	videos	and
empowering	quotes	within	Heal	Your	Life.
Have	an	uplifting	story	to	tell	and	a	passion	for	writing?	Sharpen	your	writing	skills	with
insider	tips	from	Your	Writing	Life.

Sign	Up
Now!

Get	inspired,	educate
yourself,	get	a	complimentary
gift,	and	share	the	wisdom!

http://www.hayhouse.com/newsletters.php

Visit	www.hayhouse.com	to	sign-up	today

	
	
